e january 29, 2020 chair powell. good afternoon, everyone. thanks for being here. at today’s meeting, my colleagues and i decided to leave our policy rate unchanged. as always, we base our decisions on our judgment of how best to achieve the goals congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. we believe monetary policy is well positioned to serve the american people by supporting continued economic growth, a strong job market, and a return of inflation to our symmetric 2 percent goal. the expansion is in its 11th year, the longest on record. growth in household spending moderated toward the end of last year, but with a healthy job market, rising incomes, and upbeat consumer confidence, the fundamentals supporting household spending are solid. in contrast, business investment and exports remain weak, and manufacturing output has declined over the past year. sluggish growth abroad and trade developments have been weighing on activity in these sectors. however, some of the uncertainties around trade have diminished recently, and there are some signs that global growth may be stabilizing after declining since mid-2018. nonetheless, uncertainties about the outlook remain, including those posed by the new coronavirus. overall, with monetary and financial conditions supportive, we expect moderate economic growth to continue. the unemployment rate has been near half-century lows for well more than a year, and the pace of job gains remains solid. participation in the labor force by people in their prime working years, ages 25 to 54, is at its highest level in more than a decade. and wages have been rising, particularly for lower-paying jobs. people who live and work in middle-income communities and low-income communities tell us that many who have struggled to find work are now finding new opportunities. employment gains have been broad based across all racial and  ethnic groups and all levels of education. these developments underscore for us the importance of sustaining the expansion so that the strong job market reaches more of those left behind. inflation continues to run below our symmetric 2 percent objective. over the 12 months through november, total pce inflation was 1.5 percent, and core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, was 1.6 percent. available data suggest similar inflation readings for december, though we expect inflation to move closer to 2 percent over the next few months as unusually low readings from early 2019 drop out of the calculation. while low and stable inflation is certainly a good thing, inflation that runs persistently below our objective can lead longer-term inflation expectations to drift down, pulling actual inflation even lower. in turn, interest rates would be lower as well—closer to their effective lower bound. as a result, we would have less room to reduce interest rates to support the economy in a future downturn to the detriment of american families and businesses. we have seen this dynamic play out in other economies around the world, and we are determined to avoid it here in the united states. in particular, we believe the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate to support sustained economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation returning to our 2 percent— symmetric 2 percent objective. as long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with this outlook, the current stance of monetary policy likely will remain appropriate. we will be monitoring the effects of the policy actions we took last year, along with other information bearing on the outlook, as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. of course, if developments emerge that cause a material reassessment of our outlook, we would respond accordingly. policy is not on a preset course. i will conclude with a brief overview of our current plans for our technical operations to implement monetary policy. the plan the fomc announced back in october to purchase  treasury bills and conduct repo operations has proceeded smoothly and has succeeded in providing an ample supply of reserves to the banking system and effectively controlling the federal funds rate. in light of the resulting stability in the federal funds rate and money market conditions more generally, we decided to make a small technical upward adjustment to administered rates to ensure that the federal funds rate trades well within the target range. this action reverses the small downward adjustment made in september when money markets were volatile. as our bill purchases continue to build reserves toward levels that maintain ample conditions, the role played by active repo operations will naturally recede. over the first half of this year, we intend to adjust the size and pricing of repo operations as we transition away from their active use in supplying reserves. this process will take place gradually, and, as indicated in today’s fomc directive to the desk, we expect to continue offering repos at least through april to ensure a consistently ample supply of reserves. based on current projections, we expect that the underlying level of reserves will durably reach ample levels sometime in the second quarter of this year. as we get close to that point, we intend to slow the pace of purchases and transition to a program of smaller reserve management purchases that maintains an ample level of reserves without the active use of repos. at that point, as in the pre-crisis period, our balance sheet will be expanding gradually over time, reflecting the trend growth in the demand for currency and other federal reserve liabilities. all of these technical measures are designed to support the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy and are not intended to represent a chance—a change in the stance of monetary policy. we are committed to completing the transition to our longer-run ample-reserves regime smoothly and predictably. of course, we will continue to closely monitor  conditions in money markets, and we will adjust these plans as conditions warrant. thank you, and i’ll be happy to take your questions. christopher condon. thank you. chris condon, bloomberg news. mr. chairman, i would like you to comment in a little bit more depth about one small change i’ve noted in the statement. it notes that policy will be appropriate to bring—the committee believes—inflation back to the committee’s 2 percent symmetric inflation objective. that’s a slight change from the last time, when you were expecting it to bring inflation outcomes back near the objective. and i would put this also in the context of a comment you made at the last press conference where you drew attention to the fact that a number of policymakers had projected inflation overshoots two or three years out under appropriate monetary policy. should we take all of this together to mean simply that the committee is more confident that a 2 percent outcome for inflation is already baked in the cake, or that this is a signal that the committee has a stronger resolution to bring inflation at least to the 2 percent objective and put—bring into play an informal makeup strategy for inflation? chair powell. yes. so, in making that change, our goal was, really—that was, changing “near” to “returning to”—was to avoid possible misinterpretation. so you may remember, in the december minutes we noted that a few committee members suggested that the language that stated that monetary policy would support inflation near 2 percent could be misinterpreted as suggesting that policymakers were comfortable with inflation running below that level. so we thought about that in the intermeeting period and concluded that it would be appropriate to adjust that language to send a clearer signal that we’re not comfortable with inflation rising persistently—running persistently below our 2 percent symmetric objective. so,  yes, there is something in that. it’s just that we wanted to underscore our commitment to 2 percent not being a ceiling to inflation running around—symmetrically around 2 percent, and that we’re not satisfied with inflation running below 2 percent, particularly at a time such as now where we’re a long way into an expansion and a long way into a period of very low unemployment when, in theory, inflation should be moving up. nick timiraos. thank you. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. i want to ask about the balance sheet. how many reserves are “ample”? how many reserves does the fed now think it will need to conduct policy in its current framework? and can you walk me through how you and your colleagues are arriving at that answer? chair powell. sure. so, thanks for that question. why don’t i say a few things about repos, since i know that’ll be of interest. so, just to bring you back, after last september’s brief turmoil, we took prompt and decisive action, and a result—as a result, money markets have been operating smoothly since then. just to review, those two adjustments were treasury bill purchases of at least—of $60 billion—sorry—at least into the second quarter, and term and overnight repo at least through april. and i will get to your specific question. the purpose of the adjustments has been to assure that our policy is transmitted smoothly to the federal funds rate, which requires well-functioning money markets. it doesn’t mean we’re trying to eliminate all volatility in the repo markets. we know that some volatility is normal and expected in well-functioning markets. and, as i mentioned, these adjustments have been successful in supplying an ample quantity of reserves. money markets operated smoothly, including right through year-end, and the fed funds rate has remained in our target range. so we know—we will know when these adjustments have run their course when reserves are durably at  a level that enables us to control the federal funds rate using our administered rates, the interest on reserves and reverse repo, without the need for frequent use of open market operations. based on current projections, we expect that the bill purchases will durably bring the underlying level of reserves to the ample level sometime in the second quarter of this year. and when we see that we’ve reached that level, we’ll begin to gradually reduce our asset purchases to the level of the underlying trend growth of demand for our liabilities. as our bill purchases bring the underlying level of reserves up to an ample level on a sustained basis, the necessary quantity of overnight and term repo will gradually decline. we’ve already begun the gradual reduction in the quantity of repo, and we’ll continue to reduce those offering amounts gradually as conditions permit. at some point, we’ll also raise the minimum bid rate. even after we reach an ample level of reserves, it’s possible that repo operations might play a role as a backstop and support effective control of the federal funds rate. and we’ll continue to discuss that issue and review it under our implementation framework. coming to your question, in terms of the actually desired reserve level, we know that reserves will continue to move up and down over the course of the calendar year in a wide range depending on volatility in nonreserve liabilities, particularly the treasury general account, or tga. in particular, reserve levels will need to be at a level high enough to remain ample even when the tga peaks during the april tax season. effectively, what that means is that we need reserves at all times to be no lower than they were in early september—and, i would say, around $1½ trillion, subject to learning more. reserves are going to move in a broad range, as i mentioned, and we want to be clear, that will be the bottom end of the range. we want $1½ trillion or thereabouts to be the bottom end of the range. so, most of the time, reserves will be moving in a range substantially higher than that but not going below $1½ trillion.  so it’s not an—it’s not something that we’re aiming at all the time. we know that reserves will fluctuate and be substantially higher than that most of the time. we also want interest on excess reserves and the fed funds rate to be well within the fomc’s target range. and we think that’ll be the case now that we made our technical adjustment. last points—we’re committed to making this adjustment process a smooth one. we’ll provide more details as we go, and we expect to learn as we go, as we always have. and we’re prepared to adjust the details of the plan as necessary to foster efficient and effective monetary policy implementation. steve liesman. steve liesman, cnbc. mr. chairman, thank you for the question. following up on nick’s question, i know you said it’s not qe, but it’s $390 billion over five months, which is a lot to expand the balance sheet. i guess i’d ask one more time on nick’s question—is there a number that you have in mind? secondly, a lot of people in the market are sort of concerned that it looks like qe, and they’re trading that way. are you concerned that the market is embracing this like a qe program, and that the rise in the stock market is linked to it, and you may then experience something of a “taper tantrum” the way chairman bernanke did when he tried to roll it off? chair powell. so i’ll just—i’ll repeat that—we think that the—we think we need to continue purchases until the—until reserves are at a level at which they will not go below $1½ trillion, roughly, during the course of the calendar year. and we know that the tga will move up and down there. so they’ll be much higher than that some of the time, but that’s kind of the number, and we think we’ll reach that sometime in the second quarter. that’s our estimate. but we will—we’ll know it when we get there. we’ll know it because we’ll be able to  be—to control the federal funds rate without use of—without active use, ongoing use of open market operations. you know, our intention of these—for these adjustments is just to raise the level of reserves and to allow us to conduct monetary policy in an efficient and effective manner. and that’s—that is our sole intention. i pointed out on other occasions, more than once, the differences—the really specific differences between this and the large-scale asset purchase programs. we’ve been over that. in terms of what affects markets, you know, i think many things affect markets. it’s very hard to say with any precision at any time what is affecting markets. what i can tell you is that you know what our intention is. it is to return reserves to an ample level. we expect that to happen during the second quarter. and our plan as we do that is, as those purchases get to that level, we believe we can gradually reduce them, and we believe we can also gradually reduce repo as—as we reach an ample level, as we’re satisfying demand now more from underlying reserves from bill purchases rather than from repo. and, again, the last thing i’ll say is, we’re prepared to adjust the details of this plan as we’ve shown ourselves willing to do depending on conditions. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. jeanna smialek from the new york times. i was hoping that you could talk a little bit about the labor market. we’ve recently seen wages moderating a little bit by some measures, maybe even declining a little bit by others. as you mentioned, at the lower end of the sort of talent pool, it seems like we are seeing those wages climb up a little bit, but it doesn’t seem to be consistent across the entire sort of average. i was wondering if you’d talk a little bit about whether you guys are noticing any cracks, or whether you’re worried about that, or how you’re thinking about it.  chair powell. the labor market continues to—to perform well. the labor market continues to be strong. we see strong job creation. we see low unemployment. very importantly, we see labor force participation continuing to move up, really, against expectations. if you go back a few years, you will not find a lot of forecasts suggesting that we could have been at 63.2 percent overall labor force participation or the levels of employment to population that we’re seeing now, let alone the unemployment level. so i think we’ve learned quite a lot of good things about the labor market, good things suggesting that there’s been more room to run. the performance of wages, i think, has to be seen in that context. we saw—if you go back four or five years, the four or five major wage statistics that we track were running at around 2 percent, and now they’re running at around 3 percent, which is theoretically about where they might be at full employment. it would consist of inflation plus—plus productivity growth. the—it’s a bit surprising that, with sustained levels of historically low unemployment, we haven’t seen wages moving up above that level as we have in other long expansions and other periods of low unemployment. so you asked, what can be explaining that? you know, one thing can be that the natural rate of unemployment is still lower than we think, that the labor market is not as tight as it would appear just from the 3½ percent number. and the other can be, i think, that—as i mentioned, the sort of supply-side shock or surprise that we’re receiving from higher labor force participation. people are coming in to the labor market and providing more labor supply, and that is—that’s a great thing. that’s a very healthy thing. we’re a country that has low labor force participation compared to essentially all of our advanced-economy peers, and it’s a very good, positive thing. nonetheless, it represents more labor supply, and it may be holding down wages.  michael mckee. michael mckee from bloomberg radio and television. in terms of the framework review and a little bit on chris’s question earlier, there is a general feeling now in the markets and among analysts that you’re basically setting us up for some form of inflation- target averaging where you let the inflation rate run above the 2 percent target for some time to make up for the time that it has spent below that. is that a fair or reasonable assessment of where you think you’re going to end up? what would you, chairman powell, think of that idea personally? and, as long as i’m asking, do you have any more details on when we can expect the results of the review? chair powell. thanks. i’ll just say that we undertook the review because we felt, and i felt, that it was time to incorporate the realities of what we could call the “new normal” into our policy framework. and some aspects of that new normal would include ongoing powerful global disinflationary trends, which have led to lower-than-target inflation many places in the world; secondly, a flat phillips curve, by which i mean low levels of sensitivity of inflation to resource utilization—for example, low unemployment; and, thirdly, a much lower neutral real interest rate here and around the world. so those are challenging conditions for monetary policy to deliver on our statutory goals of maximum employment and stable prices, although i would say that, under our existing framework, we’ve been able to succeed or get close to succeeding it for most of the time lately to achieve those goals, although we do struggle, as other central banks do, with the inflation goal. so this is about reviewing our strategy, tools, and communications to assure that they’re the best that we can do to achieve those goals in this environment on a sustained basis. and we continued our discussions at this meeting. i’m very, very pleased at the process so far. it’s included the 14 fed listens events around the country, at which we’ve engaged with a full range  of people and groups across american society. that was a very, very positive experience, and i think we learned a lot. we’ve now had a series of—a number of fomc meetings at which we’ve reviewed what we’ve learned and also dug deeply into strategy, tools, and communications. i expect that we will conclude the review and announce our conclusions around the middle of the year. right now, we are just at the point of coming together to put all that together. so i think i’m not the person who should be telling you my personal preferences right now. i’m trying to—and we were trying to come together as a group around a set of answers. i feel very positive about—that we’re going to come up with some good results, and i’m just going to have to wait until we get to that point to announce them. donna borak. donna borak with cnn. going back to your outlook for global growth, we’ve seen some significant headwinds, as you mentioned earlier, with the easing—with the partial u.s.–china trade deal, but now that there’s some new concern following the outbreak of the coronavirus—that it might shake global growth. we’re already seeing reports from ford and toyota that they’re planning to shut down their assembly plants for an extra week. apple is rerouting their supply chains. starbucks is shutting down close to thousands of stores. are you worried at all about what the impact would be on the u.s. economy, and do you see that as a significant risk—excuse me—to the outlook at this point? chair powell. so let me talk about the coronavirus specifically, and then i’ll turn more to global growth more generally. first, it’s a—it’s a very serious issue, and i want to start by acknowledging the significant and considerable human suffering that the virus is already causing. there is likely to be some disruption to activity in china and possibly globally based on  the spread of the virus to date and the travel restrictions and business closures that have already been imposed. of course, the situation is really in its early stages, and it’s very uncertain about how far it will spread and what the macroeconomic effects will be in china and its immediate trading partners and neighbors and around the world. so, in light of that uncertainty, i’m not going to speculate about it at this point. i will just tell you that, of course, we are very carefully monitoring the situation. and, you know, as you suggested, our framework ultimately is, what are the potential ramifications for the u.s. economy and for the achievement of our dual mandate? more broadly, though, if i can talk about the global economy for a second—and if you look at the backdrop, you know, if you go back to 2017, that was the year of synchronized growth that lasted into the middle of 2018, and then you saw slowing in growth, which lasted right through the end of last year. the fourth-quarter growth globally was quite weak last year, and a number of factors played into that. it wasn’t any one factor. there was trade policy uncertainty, absolutely, but also there was the decision by the chinese authorities to try to rein in leverage and financial excesses. there was a turn—downturn in the global high-tech manufacturing cycle in global auto production. there were some idiosyncratic strains in some countries like argentina, turkey. and then, later, in hong kong and chile, you had social unrest. so, all of those things were playing into that cycle of weakening growth over the course of 2019 and the last half of ’18. i would say, now there are grounds for what i would call “cautious optimism” about the outlook now for the global economy. many analysts are predicting a pickup in growth this year, although still to relatively modest growth rates. and i would—people are pointing to, and we  would point to, supportive financial conditions, the easing of trade tensions, the lower odds of a hard brexit. the high-tech manufacturing industry does appear to be rebounding well in asia, including in china. the latest indicators—manufacturing pmis, for example—suggest that manufacturing may have bottomed out, that they’re still below 50 in many jurisdictions, but they have moved up off of their lows. i would—i would just say, none of this is assured. as i mentioned, we saw the fourth quarter of last year came in quite weak—weaker than expected. we are not at all assured of a global rebound, but there are signs and reasons to expect it. and then comes the coronavirus, which, again, it’s too early to say what the effects will be. of course, we’re, as i mentioned, monitoring it carefully. there will clearly be implications, at least in the near term, for chinese output and, i would guess, for some of their close-in neighbors, and we’ll just have to see what the effect is globally. brendan greeley. brendan greeley with the financial times. as recently as 2018, interest on excess reserves was at the top of the band, sort of dragging the fed funds rate up. over the course of the adjustments since last year, it’s moved steadily down, closer to the bottom of the band. so, if you’re moving it back up, how high do you want to get it? are we looking to get interest on excess reserves at the top of the band again as the fed funds rate moves to the middle of the band? and should we see movements in ioer as an indicator that we’re approaching “ample”? chair powell. so our stated goal is to keep ioer and the federal funds rate well within the range. that’s it. well within the range. and that, clearly, you know—5 basis points from the bottom or from the top isn’t that. so that’s why we moved back up. you’re right. last year we were—we saw some tightness as reserves were draining out of the system. we saw  the—gradually moving up. and, in hindsight, we know what was happening. with ample reserves, we see—we see that it’s possible to bring the interest on reserves rate up to 10 basis points. so now we’re—now we are well within the range, i would say. brendan greeley. we are. so you don’t think that, as the fed funds goes back up towards the center of the range, that ioer is going to end up at the top? chair powell. don’t know that. we want it to be well within the range. i think we’ll continue to adjust it to the extent it’s appropriate. ultimately, what we’re trying to do is deliver a federal funds rate that’s well within the range. ioer is just a tool to do that. if we—if we need to make changes to keep it well within the range, we’ll do that. it just means—i mean, the thing that matters for the economy is that we keep the federal funds rate—which is the rate that, of course, transmits into other money market rates, which ultimately transmit into all kinds of financial conditions—that’s what we care about. so, ultimately, we will—we will use that tool to keep it well within the range. howard schneider. thank you. howard schneider with reuters. just to sort of close the loop on one thing, where do discussions stand on a standing repo facility? because what you’ve said so far sort of implies that there won’t be one or that it will be a limited one. so if you could just, you know, let us know where that discussion stands. and also— unidentified speaker. can you turn mic over? turn the mic over. howard schneider. sorry about that. sorry about that. did you get the question? did you hear the question okay? chair powell. i did. i don’t think—i’m not sure your colleagues did. [laughter] howard schneider. where do the discussions stand on standing repo? [aside] that was great.  and the other thing is, on the, you know, on the standing repo facility and on the purchases—treasury bill purchases, as you enter this new regime later in the second quarter or later in the year, will that be preannounced by amounts? will there be preset amounts like you’re doing now, or will that just be something that people will have to sort of intuit and figure out as you go along? chair powell. so i’ll go in reverse order. when we—when we make decisions about the steps we’re going to be taking in that adjustment process that i described at some length, we’ll be making them as early as we can and as transparently as we can—and specifically. but we’re not at that stage. it’s january, and we’re several months away from— from that. in terms of the standing repo facility, as i mentioned in, i guess, in my answer to an earlier question, there may well be a role for repo in this system even after we’re at an ample- reserves level. now, we haven’t decided what that role is, we have not decided—we haven’t at all made a decision on a standing repo facility. we haven’t. we’ve had a couple of discussions about it, as you know, back in, i guess, june and october. and there’s a range of views. we’re going to return, i would say, fairly soon to this question. and i think it was wise to wait, because we’re still getting a better sense of what that— what that world looks like. and, you know, it’s really going to be a question of, how useful will it be? what will be the costs and benefits? and my thinking is, we will return to that fairly soon, and i wouldn’t assume a decision one way or the other. really, we haven’t made one, because we haven’t had to. and i think you—when you delay, you get more information by waiting. it’s good to wait. we don’t have any urgency in making that decision, because we’re still trying to find that sort of stable equilibrium where we’re in an ample-reserves regime.  heather long. heather long from the washington post. i’m wondering, do you think that there is a financial stability risk from climate change? you’ve spoken several times that you think severe weather events are happening more often and that the fed is monitoring what that could physically do to a bank or a financial institution, but that’s sort of one institution. do you think there’s a systemwide risk that may—that could develop from climate change? chair powell. so that’s an interesting question—the question being, is there a systemwide financial stability risk? i’d say, over—over the longer term, it’s certainly possible, and i would say that sort of feeds into the way we’re thinking about climate change as an institution. so, as i’ve mentioned, climate change is an important issue, a very important issue, but it’s essentially assigned to many other agencies in the federal government and state governments for leadership on that. and, importantly, society’s overall response to climate change needs to be decided by elected officials and not by the fed. all of that said, if you look at our mandate, we’ve got a monetary policy mandate and, more immediately perhaps, a supervisory mandate where we’re supervising financial markets, utilities, and financial institutions, banks. and we haven’t—we share overall responsibility for financial stability with a number of agencies. and that latter part—i think the public has every right to expect and will expect that we will assure that the financial system is resilient and robust against the risks from climate change. now, i think that’s got to be right. we are in the very early stages, as are other central banks, in understanding just what that means. and there’s quite a lot of work going on around the world at other central banks and at the fed, too, to think that through. but i do think it’s—in that sense, it has to be part of our role, and—but not the overall response of society to climate change. that’s not us.  heather long. and if i could follow up, can you clarify why the fed hasn’t signed on to the network for greening the financial system like 40 other central banks have? chair powell. so we’ve attended all of their meetings and taken part in them, and we’ve been looking at joining in one form or another and talking to them about that. we probably will do that at some point. so that’s—that’s an ongoing question. but we’re very much attending those meetings and taking part in them. edward lawrence. thank you, mr. chairman. edward lawrence from fox business network. so there was a signing of a ratified usmca at the white house today. mid- february, the phase-one china deal gets—goes into effect. have you seen business investment pick up at all? if not, what will it take to get that business investment going as this uncertainty is—is being cleared up? chair powell. yes. so i guess i’d start by saying that the fact that we’ve reached a phase-one deal with china and the fact that we’ve moved ahead closer to getting usm[c]a agreed—those are potentially positive things for the economy without question. without question. and financial markets—the reaction of financial markets is very consistent with that perception. a sustained reduction in uncertainty over time should improve business sentiment, investment, which would provide some additional support for the economy. it’s important, though, to bear in mind a couple of things. first, trade policy uncertainty remains elevated. businesses continue to identify it as an ongoing risk. we still have two or even three active trade discussions that are going on in the public square right now. so it hasn’t gone away, and we’ve just come through a round of talking to our vast network of comments— sorry, contacts in the business world. and i think, clearly, these are seen as positive developments going forward, but there’s a bit of a wait-and-see attitude—is this going to be  sustained? the agreements have to be implemented, too, and that’ll take quite some time. so, i would say, we need to be a little bit patient about the effect on the economy. there’s also the global economy. you could—you could well see manufacturing—as i mentioned, manufacturing pmis have started to tick up consistently among both advanced economies and emerging market economies. we do not see a decisive recovery, but it’s possible that this mix of positive developments and also accommodative financial conditions could spur further growth. michael derby. hi, mike derby with dow jones. do you have any greater sense of what—what was going wrong with the repo market starting in september? there seemed to be, you know—whether it was a one-off event, you know, too tight around tax payments and debt settlement, or whether there’s a more enduring issue going on with the market, more structural forces that are basically gumming up the repo sector. chair powell. yes. as for those forces, so, as we indicated, we would undertake a, you know, serious review of that question and look at both our regulations and also supervisory practices. and we’d be prepared to adjust those in ways that might encourage liquidity to flow more easily in the system as long as it didn’t undermine safety and soundness. and so we’ve undertaken that, and we’ve done a ton of work, actually. we don’t have anything to announce here today, but i feel good about the—what we’ve learned there. i think—you mentioned other factors. we will be announcing our findings. i’m not going to give you a time, but we’re— we’re well along in that assessment at this time. i think we also found out, though, that the level of reserves that we need in the system to conduct our operations without frequent resort to open market operations was higher than we had thought and was higher than others had thought, too. we learned that we can’t let reserves—we  shouldn’t let reserves go below $1½ trillion—roughly, the level of early september—at any point. and that means that reserves will move through in a range over the course of the year that will be substantially higher than $1½ [trillion], but they won’t ever go below. so $1½ [trillion] is not a target level. it is the bottom of a range in which reserves will be expected to move. christopher rugaber. hi, mr. chairman. i just wanted to ask about how your balance sheet operations and repo—temporary repos—how they affect the system and who they’re helping. clearly, they’re mostly designed, as you said, to get—keep the fed funds rate in the range you’re looking for. but, certainly, the repo market is also used heavily by hedge funds and other wall street institutions. and so, how would you explain to, sort of, main street why you’re doing all this for that market? and how would you address criticism that it is helping mostly wall street, along with everything else? thank you. chair powell. well, let me just stress that we have a very specific and important reason for caring about money market operations generally, and that just is that we are—our monetary policy decisions are transmitted through the financial markets—through the money markets into other financial markets and into broader financial conditions. so we care that money markets are operating smoothly. and they stopped operating smoothly, briefly, back in september. and so we acted. this is a one-time thing that we’re doing to adjust the level of reserves so that the money markets will be able to operate smoothly on an ongoing basis. repo markets are important, because that’s where treasury securities—the purchase of treasury securities, which is the way—you know, the federal—part of the way the federal government is funding its operations. it’s the way those are financed. so these are largely treasury securities that have been purchased by dealers to—for distribution to—and buyers, to a substantial extent. that’s what’s going on in the treasury repo market. so it’s just the financing  for—for that. now, again, we don’t—that activity is a—is a market activity. we’re not looking to eliminate volatility or protect anybody from volatility at all. what we care about is that volatility in the repo market can affect the transmission of—of our policy decisions to federal funds rate, and that really is important for the public. nancy marshall-genzer. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. chair powell, is the fed going to vote tomorrow on changes to the volcker rule restrictions on banks investing in venture capital funds? what can you tell us about what the fed is considering? and why make those changes? chair powell. sure. so we will be looking tomorrow and voting on a—a new part of—part of the existing volcker rule, and that is the covered fund provisions of the rule. and we’ll be making a bunch of proposed revisions that we believe are faithful to both the letter and the spirit of the law. we’re going to put those proposals out for public discussion, and we’re going to listen carefully, as we always do, to public comments on those proposals. again, we believe that they will be—and you’ll see them tomorrow—will be public—you know, will be publicly—we have a board meeting tomorrow to do that. nancy marshall-genzer. now, is this just the venture capital funds, or are also you changing the rules for hedge funds and private equity funds? chair powell. it’s covered funds. it’s—so it’s that covered—so it’s not the proprietary trading part of volcker. it’s the covered funds part. nancy marshall-genzer. and is there a chance that banks could take this and run and maybe even get involved in mortgage-backed securities again and risky investments? chair powell. you know, we’ll—we think that what we’re doing is—is very consistent with safety and soundness and absolutely consistent with the letter and spirit of the  volcker rule. we’ll be—we’ll be getting comments from people, and we’ll be looking into that question, among many others. greg robb. thank you. thank you, chairman powell. i’d like to turn your attention back to china and the health of its financial sector in particular. and i guess i’m basing my question on reading the transcripts from 2014 that came out earlier this month. just—in march of that year, there was concern about the chinese economy, and one of your colleagues on the fomc at that time asked the staff about how the chinese economy would hurt—hit the u.s. economy. and the staffer said that there was a—what they were worried about was that not only was the chinese economy slowing down, but there was the financial sector. and the quote was: “there’s a tremendous amount of dodgy loans in china.” now, i was wondering if you could give us an update on these problems in the chinese financial sector. and how do you think it might impact the economy, particularly now that they’ve been hit by this unexpected shock? chair powell. well, china has had a problem for some years, including from that period—2014 up until, i guess, ’17 or ’18, and i thought—which was essentially just a lot of debt for an emerging market. for an economy at the—at the stage of evolution of the chinese economy, they had very high levels of debt—not sovereign debt the way we think of it, but more business debt—debt of state-owned enterprises and also just private businesses. and a couple of years ago the authorities decided to try to get that under control—to stop the growth and to control it. and that—as i mentioned, that’s one of the reasons why chinese growth slowed, and it’s one of the reasons why global growth slowed, because we felt that. and they’ve actually stuck to that even during this difficult period when they were experiencing, you know, strains from trade negotiations and that kind of thing. the authorities have stuck to that  and have, again, continued to try to do that, so—to try to control the growth of debt. and that’s important that they do that. we don’t think that—that there’s any imminent risk there, although you—as you point out, the coronavirus thing is a significant thing, which will—will have some effects on the chinese economy, at least in the short term. the chinese economy is very important in the global economy now. and, you know, we—when china’s economy slows down, we do feel that—not as much as countries, though, that are near china or that trade more actively with china, like some of the western european countries. we still have—you know, 85 percent of our economy is domestic. and we have a much smaller external sector, trade sector, than other economies just because of our physical location. brian cheung. hi. brian cheung here, yahoo finance. so the combination of t-bill purchases and repo operations have been described colloquially as “liquidity.” i’m just wondering if you semantically agree with that description—then, secondly, what the impact of that has been on risk assets. i don’t know if that’s something that, you know, the board or reserve banks are formally looking into or just looking at what the effect of it has been. how are you kind of thinking about that going forward? thanks. chair powell. well, so, two questions. i mean, in terms of liquidity, i think what we’re doing is what i said: we’re trying to raise the level of reserves back up to a level so that banks can meet their reserve requirements, and that there’s enough reserves in the system that we don’t see reserve scarcity, and we don’t have to use repo operations to provide additional reserves. so i think, as i mentioned, we believe we can get to that state at the current pace sometime in the second quarter.  in terms of effects on risk assets, as i said earlier, it’s very hard to say what is affecting financial markets with any precision or confidence at a given time. it’s not our intention to change the stance of monetary policy. these were designed to provide more reserves and, really, to do that in order to enable better transmission of our—of our rate decisions into the economy under our chosen framework. that’s really the purpose of what we’re doing. jean yung. hi. jean yung with mni. i wanted to ask about the framework review again. would a shift of focus to inflation over an average period—would that call for a different policy stance if you made that shift? and whether or not we know the answer to that question, would the fed consider changing the stance of monetary policy for that reason even if there was no change to the economic outlook? chair powell. well, as you know, we’re comfortable with our current policy stance. we think it’s appropriate. we think it’ll remain appropriate as long as data coming in are broadly in keeping with our outlook. over time—over time, though—let me take a step back. over time, an average inflation-targeting framework would be different than our current framework, in the sense that it wouldn’t be a—there would be some aspect of trying to make inflation average 2 percent over time, which means, if it runs below 2 percent for a time, it has to run above to bring the average up. so that is a different framework. our current framework is one where we say—or we’d be equally concerned with deviations of inflation from target on either side. but that isn’t—that doesn’t suggest an intention specifically to have those deviations be symmetric. in other words, that would— consistent with that would be having all the deviations be on one side, which is what we’ve had, actually. so i think it is a change in framework, and over time it would lead to a different  approach to policy. again, i’m not trying to—i don’t want to comment on the current stance of policy, which we do think is appropriate. don lee. don lee with the l.a. times. i wanted to ask you about the stock market. by historical comparisons, as you know, valuations are considerably high. and i just wonder how much discussion and concern you and your colleagues have about that and what risks you see for the economy. chair powell. so we—we look at a very broad range of financial conditions where—there isn’t any one financial condition that we—that we look at. and when we look at financial conditions, what matters for the real economy is substantial changes in—or, material changes in financial conditions that are sustained over a period of time. if i can, maybe i’ll—maybe i’ll answer that in the context of our overall financial stability framework. that’s one way to look at it. so we look at—when we look at financial stability, we look at—really, we’ve got four pillars to that, the first of which is leverage in the financial system that is at a comfortable level. our banks, particularly our large banks, have high levels of capital. the second is leverage in the nonfinancial sector, and that divides into households and businesses. households’ debt to gdp is—has been coming down since the financial crisis. it’s not moving up. it’s at low—low levels compared to what it was before the crisis. so not every household—but, in the aggregate, household debt is in a good place, a very good place. business debt has been moving up. we’ve been calling that out for more than a year—substantially more than a year, and it’s something we’re focused on. and we’ve taken appropriate measures and are monitoring carefully. but we think it’s not something that would threaten financial stability, but more be an amplifier.  the other one is asset purchases, getting to your—sorry, asset prices, getting to your question. we do see asset valuations as being somewhat elevated—i do—somewhat elevated. if you look at risk spreads, they’re narrow. if you look at p/es, they’re high. i think the way to think about—a good way—one way to think about equity prices, though, is, what’s the premium you’re getting paid to own equities rather than risk-free debt? and that’s also at fairly low levels, but not extremely low levels. so valuations are high, but not at extremes. the final factor is funding risk. are big financial institutions and other players in the financial system funded with stable funding, or is there a lot of run risk? and the answer is, very stable funding, for the most part. so if you look at, overall—what you see, in my view, is, vulnerabilities to the financial—to financial stability are moderate overall. katy o’donnell. hi. katy o’donnell, politico. i wanted to know, do you support governor brainard’s vision for the community reinvestment act reform? and is this something that we could see the fed formally propose at some point? chair powell. so let me say that i think this is a good time to do—to update cra, really, in a way that is a win–win both for the intended beneficiaries—low- and moderate- income communities—and also for banks that would like to have more certainty about—about what does and doesn’t qualify and that sort of thing. the law can both be more effective and more efficient is—it comes down to. and we think this is a good way. it’s also just a good time to take on board the way the delivery of banking services has changed through technology and demographic change as well. we worked very hard to try to get on the same page with the other two agencies. we think that an interagency final rule together would be the best outcome. we’re sorry we haven’t been able to get there, and we still hold out some hope that we will be able to. we spent a lot of  time on research and analysis and looking at meaningful reform. you saw governor brainard’s recent speech presenting some of the thinking and the analysis. and we haven’t made any decisions about what we’re going to do, about whether we’ll propose—i mean, our focus has been entirely on trying to get to agreement with the occ, really. so we haven’t made any decisions about what we’re going to do going forward. in terms of, you know—governor brainard led our oversight committee over these activities for many years, and i asked her to take the lead on cra modernization, which is a high priority for us. i was comfortable with her speech, and i’m comfortable with the work we’ve done and with the fed’s position on this. as i said, we haven’t chosen to bring a proposal forward. we haven’t decided what to do, whether—going forward. and we’re not going to comment on the other proposal. it’s just not appropriate to do. it’s not about us. it’s not about our views. it’s about the views of the interested parties. hannah lang. hannah lang with american banker. thank you for being here today. i wanted to ask about vice chair quarles’s recent speech on bank supervision in which he laid out some suggestions for making changes to the supervisory regime. i wanted to ask, do you agree with his approach? and are there any plans to codify some of these suggestions later in the year? chair powell. so i do agree that—the principles that he articulated of firm and fair supervision and effective transparency in communications. i also think it’s a good thing that we would have brighter lines to define our liscc supervisory portfolio, which we haven’t really had to date. remember that when a firm moves from one portfolio to another, that doesn’t mean that its level of scrutiny or supervision will change.  so—and i also thought that, you know, the—he’s raising some very interesting questions about, if you—in the first part of the speech, where he’s talking about regulation and supervision and, you know, how to—how to balance the desire for transparency and due process in everything the government does with the needs of confidential supervision. it’s a very challenging question. it’s one that could use further thought. and as far as the specific, you know, proposals, there’s—you know, they’re interesting, you know, and need further development and will need lots of comment and that sort of thing. mark hamrick. thank you. here we go. sorry, i had it [the microphone] upside down. that’s not too good. mr. chairman, mark hamrick with bankrate. thank you. i wanted to ask you a question about the—one of the unintended consequences over the years-long low interest rate environment, and that is that savers haven’t gotten as much return as would have otherwise been the case. what would you say to those individuals who’ve seen the fed again cutting rates, eroding their ability to get a higher return on their savings? and how much would you take their plight into consideration? how much can you sympathize with them? chair powell. sure. so we—we are assigned a job by congress, and that is to use our tools to pursue maximum employment and stable prices. and that’s what—that’s our focus. now, monetary policy is a blunt instrument, but it’s a powerful one. so i think if you look— look at the time since the financial crisis. that was—in the week [wake] of fairly modest growth, it was a powerful recovery in the labor market. and part of that just is the effect of lower interest rates. so, if—so many, many people benefit from low interest rates. in fact, you don’t hear—when you talk to the low- and moderate-income communities, one thing you don’t  hear is, “you ought to raise rates.” that’s not what you hear. you hear quite the opposite, which is, you know, “please do whatever you can to keep this expansion going.” i absolutely sympathize with people. if you’re living on just the interest in a bank or on fixed-income generally, then that’s a challenging thing. on the other hand, if you own a home, home values—the housing market has recovered, other financial assets have recovered, so—but, yes, for some people who are limited to those sources plus whatever other help they get, it can be challenging. i mean, we have to do what’s best for the—for the overall society and the economy. that’s—those are our orders from congress. thanks very much.   NA
NA annual organizational matters7 the agenda for this meeting reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate members of the federal open market committee for a term beginning january 28, 2020, were received and that these individuals executed their oaths of office. committee organizational documents are available at . 7  minutes of the meeting of january 28–29, 2020 page 3 the elected members and alternate members were as follows: john c. williams, president of the federal reserve bank of new york, with michael strine, first vice president of the federal reserve bank of new york, as alternate patrick harker, president of the federal reserve bank of philadelphia, with thomas i. barkin, president of the federal reserve bank of richmond, as alternate loretta j. mester, president of the federal reserve bank of cleveland, with charles l. evans, president of the federal reserve bank of chicago, as alternate robert s. kaplan, president of the federal reserve bank of dallas, with raphael w. bostic, president of the federal reserve bank of atlanta, as alternate neel kashkari, president of the federal reserve bank of minneapolis, with mary c. daly, president of the federal reserve bank of san francisco, as alternate by unanimous vote, the following officers of the committee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the committee in 2021: jerome h. powell john c. williams james a. clouse matthew m. luecke michelle a. smith mark e. van der weide michael held richard m. ashton thomas laubach stacey tevlin beth anne wilson chairman vice chairman secretary deputy secretary assistant secretary general counsel deputy general counsel assistant general counsel economist economist economist shaghil ahmed michael dotsey marc giannoni joseph w. gruber beverly hirtle david e. lebow trevor a. reeve ellis w. tallman william wascher mark l.j. wright associate economists by unanimous vote, the committee selected the federal reserve bank of new york to execute transactions for the system open market account (soma). by unanimous vote, the committee selected lorie k. logan to serve at the pleasure of the committee as manager of the soma, on the understanding that her selection was subject to being satisfactory to the federal reserve bank of new york. secretary’s note: the federal reserve bank of new york subsequently sent advice that the manager selection indicated previously was satisfactory. by unanimous vote, the committee voted to reaffirm without revision the authorization for domestic open market operations as shown below. the guidelines for the conduct of system open market operations in federal-agency issues remained suspended. authorization for domestic open market operations (as reaffirmed effective january 28, 2020) open market transactions 1. the federal open market committee (the “committee”) authorizes and directs the federal reserve bank selected by the committee to execute open market transactions (the “selected bank”), to the extent necessary to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted by the committee: a. to buy or sell in the open market securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, the united states, and securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the united states, that are eligible for purchase or sale under section 14(b) of the federal reserve act (“eligible securities”) for the system open market account (“soma”): i. as an outright operation with securities dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained at the selected bank: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis (including such transactions as are commonly referred to as dollar rolls and coupon swaps) at market prices; or ii. as a temporary operation: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis, to purchase such eligible securities subject to an agreement to resell (“repo transactions”) or to sell such eligible securities subject to an agreement to repurchase (“reverse repo transactions”) for a term of 65 business days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise authorized by the committee, are determined by competitive bidding,  page 4 federal open market committee after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual counterparties; b. to allow eligible securities in the soma to mature without replacement; c. to exchange, at market prices, in connection with a treasury auction, maturing eligible securities in the soma with the treasury, in the case of eligible securities that are direct obligations of the united states or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the united states; and d. to exchange, at market prices, maturing eligible securities in the soma with an agency of the united states, in the case of eligible securities that are direct obligations of that agency or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by that agency. securities lending 2. in order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, the committee authorizes the selected bank to operate a program to lend eligible securities held in the soma to dealers on an overnight basis (except that the selected bank may lend eligible securities for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions). a. such securities lending must be: i. at rates determined by competitive bidding; ii. at a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives of the program; iii. subject to reasonable limitations on the total amount of a specific issue of eligible securities that may be auctioned; and iv. subject to reasonable limitations on the amount of eligible securities that each borrower may borrow. b. the selected bank may: i. reject bids that, as determined in its sole discretion, could facilitate a bidder’s ability to control a single issue; ii. accept treasury securities or cash as collateral for any loan of securities authorized in this paragraph 2; and iii. accept agency securities as collateral only for a loan of agency securities authorized in this paragraph 2. operational readiness testing 3. the committee authorizes the selected bank to undertake transactions of the type described in para- graphs 1 and 2 from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness, subject to the following limitations: a. all transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 shall be conducted with prior notice to the committee; b. the aggregate par value of the transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 that are of the type described in paragraph 1.a.i, 1.b, 1.c and 1.d shall not exceed $5 billion per calendar year; and c. the outstanding amount of the transactions described in paragraphs 1.a.ii and 2 shall not exceed $5 billion at any given time. transactions with customer accounts 4. in order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments or other authorized services for foreign central bank and international accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank (the “foreign accounts”) and accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank as fiscal agent of the united states pursuant to section 15 of the federal reserve act (together with the foreign accounts, the “customer accounts”), the committee authorizes the following when undertaken on terms comparable to those available in the open market: a. the selected bank, for the soma, to undertake reverse repo transactions in eligible securities held in the soma with the customer accounts for a term of 65 business days or less; and b. any federal reserve bank that maintains customer accounts, for any such customer account, when appropriate and subject to all other necessary authorization and approvals, to: i. undertake repo transactions in eligible securities with dealers with a corresponding reverse repo transaction in such eligible securities with the customer accounts; and ii. undertake intra-day repo transactions in eligible securities with foreign accounts. transactions undertaken with customer accounts under the provisions of this paragraph 4 may provide for a service fee when appropriate. transactions undertaken with customer accounts are also subject to the authorization or approval of other entities, including the board of governors of the federal reserve system and, when involving accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank as fiscal agent of the united states, the united states department of the treasury.  minutes of the meeting of january 28–29, 2020 page 5 additional matters 5. the committee authorizes the chairman of the committee, in fostering the committee’s objectives during any period between meetings of the committee, to instruct the selected bank to act on behalf of the committee to: a. adjust somewhat in exceptional circumstances the stance of monetary policy and to take actions that may result in material changes in the composition and size of the assets in the soma; or b. undertake transactions with respect to eligible securities in order to appropriately address temporary disruptions of an operational or highly unusual nature in u.s. dollar funding markets. any such adjustment described in subparagraph a of this paragraph 5 shall be made in the context of the committee’s discussion and decision about the stance of policy at its most recent meeting and the committee’s long-run objectives to foster maximum employment and price stability, and shall be based on economic, financial, and monetary developments since the most recent meeting of the committee. the chairman, whenever feasible, will consult with the committee before making any instruction under this paragraph 5. the committee voted unanimously to reaffirm without revision the authorization for foreign currency operations and the foreign currency directive as shown below. authorization for foreign currency operations (as reaffirmed effective january 28, 2020) in general 1. the federal open market committee (the “committee”) authorizes the federal reserve bank selected by the committee (the “selected bank”) to execute open market transactions for the system open market account as provided in this authorization, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the committee: a. to purchase and sell foreign currencies (also known as cable transfers) at home and abroad in the open market, including with the united states treasury, with foreign monetary authorities, with the bank for international settlements, and with other entities in the open market. this authorization to purchase and sell foreign currencies encompasses purchases and sales through standalone spot or forward transactions and through foreign exchange swap transactions. for purposes of this authorization, foreign exchange swap transactions are: swap transactions with the united states treasury (also known as warehousing transactions), swap transactions with other central banks under reciprocal currency arrangements, swap transactions with other central banks under standing dollar liquidity and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements, and swap transactions with other entities in the open market. b. to hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to receive or to deliver, foreign currencies. 2. all transactions in foreign currencies undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall, unless otherwise authorized by the committee, be conducted: a. in a manner consistent with the obligations regarding exchange arrangements under article iv of the articles of agreement of the international monetary fund (imf).1 b. in close and continuous cooperation and consultation, as appropriate, with the united states treasury. c. in consultation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities, foreign central banks, and international monetary institutions. d. at prevailing market rates. standalone spot and forward transactions 3. for any operation that involves standalone spot or forward transactions in foreign currencies: a. approval of such operation is required as follows: i. the committee must direct the selected bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.c of this authorization, exceeding $5 billion since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the committee. the foreign currency subcommittee (the “subcommittee”) must direct the selected bank in advance to execute the operation if the subcommittee believes that consultation with the committee is not feasible in the time available. ii. the committee authorizes the subcommittee to direct the selected bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.c of this authorization, totaling $5 billion or less since the close  page 6 federal open market committee of the most recent regular meeting of the committee. b. such an operation also shall be: i. generally directed at countering disorderly market conditions; or ii. undertaken to adjust system balances in light of probable future needs for currencies; or iii. conducted for such other purposes as may be determined by the committee. c. for purposes of this authorization, the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of the dollar values of individual foreign currencies purchased and sold, valued at the time of the transaction. warehousing 4. the committee authorizes the selected bank, with the prior approval of the subcommittee and at the request of the united states treasury, to conduct swap transactions with the united states exchange stabilization fund established by section 10 of the gold reserve act of 1934 under agreements in which the selected bank purchases foreign currencies from the exchange stabilization fund and the exchange stabilization fund repurchases the foreign currencies from the selected bank at a later date (such purchases and sales also known as warehousing). reciprocal currency arrangements, and standing dollar and foreign currency liquidity swaps 5. the committee authorizes the selected bank to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements established under the north american framework agreement, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements as provided in this authorization and to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the committee. a. for reciprocal currency arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the committee (or by the subcommittee, if the subcommittee believes that consultation with the committee is not feasible in the time available). b. for standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the chairman. the chairman may approve a schedule of potential drawings, and may delegate to the manager, system open market account, the authority to approve individual drawings that occur according to the schedule approved by the chairman. c. for standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the committee (or by the subcommittee, if the subcommittee believes that consultation with the committee is not feasible in the time available). d. operations involving standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements shall generally be directed at countering strains in financial markets in the united states or abroad, or reducing the risk that they could emerge, so as to mitigate their effects on economic and financial conditions in the united states. e. for reciprocal currency arrangements, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements: i. all arrangements are subject to annual review and approval by the committee; ii. any new arrangements must be approved by the committee; and iii. any changes in the terms of existing arrangements must be approved in advance by the chairman. the chairman shall keep the committee informed of any changes in terms, and the terms shall be consistent with principles discussed with and guidance provided by the committee. other operations in foreign currencies 6. any other operations in foreign currencies for which governance is not otherwise specified in this authorization (such as foreign exchange swap transactions with private-sector counterparties) must be authorized and directed in advance by the committee. foreign currency holdings 7. the committee authorizes the selected bank to hold foreign currencies for the system open market account in accounts maintained at foreign central banks, the bank for international settlements, and such other foreign institutions as approved by the board of governors under section 214.5 of regulation n, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the committee. a. the selected bank shall manage all holdings of foreign currencies for the system open market account:  minutes of the meeting of january 28–29, 2020 page 7 i. primarily, to ensure sufficient liquidity to enable the selected bank to conduct foreign currency operations as directed by the committee; ii. secondarily, to maintain a high degree of safety; iii. subject to paragraphs 7.a.i and 7.a.ii, to provide the highest rate of return possible in each currency; and iv. to achieve such other objectives as may be authorized by the committee. b. the selected bank may manage such foreign currency holdings by: i. purchasing and selling obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, a foreign government or agency thereof (“permitted foreign securities”) through outright purchases and sales; ii. purchasing permitted foreign securities under agreements for repurchase of such permitted foreign securities and selling such securities under agreements for the resale of such securities; and iii. managing balances in various time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions approved by the board of governors under regulation n. c. the subcommittee, in consultation with the committee, may provide additional instructions to the selected bank regarding holdings of foreign currencies. additional matters 8. the committee authorizes the chairman: a. with the prior approval of the committee, to enter into any needed agreement or understanding with the secretary of the united states treasury about the division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the system and the united states treasury; b. to advise the secretary of the united states treasury concerning system foreign currency operations, and to consult with the secretary on policy matters relating to foreign currency operations; c. to designate federal reserve system persons authorized to communicate with the united states treasury concerning system open market account foreign currency operations; and d. from time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information to the national advisory council on international monetary and financial policies. 9. the committee authorizes the selected bank to undertake transactions of the type described in this authorization, and foreign exchange and investment transactions that it may be otherwise authorized to undertake, from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness. the aggregate amount of such transactions shall not exceed $2.5 billion per calendar year. these transactions shall be conducted with prior notice to the committee. 10. all federal reserve banks shall participate in the foreign currency operations for system open market account in accordance with paragraph 3g(1) of the board of governors’ statement of procedure with respect to foreign relationships of federal reserve banks dated january 1, 1944. 11. any authority of the subcommittee pursuant to this authorization may be exercised by the chairman if the chairman believes that consultation with the subcommittee is not feasible in the time available. the chairman shall promptly report to the subcommittee any action approved by the chairman pursuant to this paragraph. 12. the committee authorizes the chairman, in exceptional circumstances where it would not be feasible to convene the committee, to foster the committee’s objectives by instructing the selected bank to engage in foreign currency operations not otherwise authorized pursuant to this authorization. any such action shall be made in the context of the committee’s discussion and decisions regarding foreign currency operations. the chairman, whenever feasible, will consult with the committee before making any instruction under this paragraph.  1 in general, as specified in article iv, each member of the imf undertakes to collaborate with the imf and other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates. these obligations include seeking to direct the member’s economic and financial policies toward the objective of fostering orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability. these obligations also include avoiding manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in such a way that would impede effective balance of payments adjustment or to give an unfair competitive advantage over other members. foreign currency directive (as reaffirmed effective january 28, 2020) 1. the committee directs the federal reserve bank selected by the committee (the “selected bank”) to execute open market transactions, for the system open market account, in accordance with the provisions of the authorization for foreign currency operations (the “authorization”) and subject to the limits in this directive.  page 8 federal open market committee 2. the committee directs the selected bank to execute warehousing transactions, if so requested by the united states treasury and if approved by the foreign currency subcommittee (the “subcommittee”), subject to the limitation that the outstanding balance of united states dollars provided to the united states treasury as a result of these transactions not at any time exceed $5 billion. 3. the committee directs the selected bank to maintain, for the system open market account: a. reciprocal currency arrangements with the following foreign central banks: foreign central bank maximum amount (millions of dollars or equivalent) bank of canada bank of mexico 2,000 3,000 b. standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements with the following foreign central banks: bank of canada bank of england bank of japan european central bank swiss national bank c. standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the following foreign central banks: bank of canada bank of england bank of japan european central bank swiss national bank 4. the committee directs the selected bank to hold and to invest foreign currencies in the portfolio in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 7 of the authorization. 5. the committee directs the selected bank to report to the committee, at each regular meeting of the committee, on transactions undertaken pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 6 of the authorization. the selected bank is also directed to provide quarterly reports to the committee regarding the management of the foreign currency holdings pursuant to paragraph 7 of the authorization. 6. the committee directs the selected bank to conduct testing of transactions for the purpose of operational readiness in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9 of the authorization. by unanimous vote, the committee amended its program for security of fomc information (program) with three sets of changes, effective february 1, 2020. these changes consisted of (1) an update to the rules for eligibility for access to fomc information to reflect two new policies approved by the board; (2) the addition of references to existing federal reserve polices that help safeguard fomc information; and (3) organizational and technical changes to improve the consistency and accuracy of program language. by unanimous vote, the committee provided approval for the publication of a federal register notice of proposed rulemaking that seeks public comment on minor and technical updates to the fomc rules regarding availability of information, which are the committee’s freedom of information act rules. review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices participants continued their discussion related to the ongoing review of the federal reserve’s monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. at this meeting, the discussion focused on two topics: the potential interactions between monetary policy and financial stability and the potential use of inflation ranges around the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. the staff briefing on the first topic noted that in the current environment of low neutral rates, achieving the committee’s dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability would require low policy rates frequently, regardless of the monetary policy strategy and tools chosen. consequently, policy strategies and tools that help support a stronger economy and anchor inflation expectations at a level consistent with the committee’s objective in a low-neutral-rate environment can help promote financial stability. in addition, the staff reported that the available empirical evidence suggests that the effects of changes in policy rates on asset prices and risk premiums tend to be modest relative to the historical fluctuations in those measures. however, there may be circumstances in which a persistently accommodative policy stance that is otherwise consistent with the dual-mandate goals may contribute to an increase in financial system vulnerabilities, including through increased borrowing, financial leverage, and valuation pressures. the staff noted that clear communications of  minutes of the meeting of january 28–29, 2020 page 9 the committee’s ongoing assessments of the interactions between monetary policy and financial stability could help avoid large interest rate surprises that could otherwise contribute to financial vulnerabilities. the briefing concluded with a short review of how other central banks have approached this issue, including the use of financial instability escape clauses to provide leeway for the central bank to deviate from its usual monetary policy strategy if financial vulnerabilities become significant. in their discussion of the effects that alternative monetary policy strategies and tools might have on financial stability, participants noted that macroeconomic stability and the achievement of the committee’s dual mandate depended on a stable financial system. an unstable financial system may amplify shocks to the economy and exacerbate increases in unemployment or drive inflation further away from the committee’s goal. with respect to the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability, some participants noted that evidence regarding the link between the policy stance and elevated financial vulnerabilities was limited, with a couple of participants further observing that there were not many episodes of persistently low interest rates. in addition, some past episodes of heightened financial vulnerabilities were associated with excessive risk-taking behavior that did not seem to be very responsive to typical changes in interest rates. a number of participants judged that, under some circumstances, low policy rates might help foster financial stability provided they are needed to support strong economic conditions and price stability. some participants remarked, however, that keeping policy rates low to achieve both of the committee’s dual-mandate objectives may contribute to a buildup of financial vulnerabilities, especially at times when the economy is at or above full employment, a development that could pose future risks to the economy and to the ability of the committee to achieve its dual mandate. participants discussed how financial stability considerations should be incorporated in the conduct of monetary policy. they generally agreed that supervisory, regulatory, and macroprudential tools should be the primary means to address financial stability risks. a few participants commented that this is especially the case when addressing risks associated with structural features such as the current low level of neutral interest rates. a number of participants noted that countercyclical macroprudential tools, such as the countercyclical capital buffer, could be used to address cyclical financial stability risks. however, various participants noted that while these tools could be deployed proactively to lean against the buildup of financial vulnerabilities, they have some limitations in the context of the u.s. financial system, where the few available tools are, for the most part, not designed to address vulnerabilities outside the banking sector. in addition, these tools are not within the authority of the committee, and their use requires coordination with other prudential regulators. recognizing these limitations, many participants remarked that the committee should not rule out the possibility of adjusting the stance of monetary policy to mitigate financial stability risks, particularly when those risks have important implications for the economic outlook and when macroprudential tools had been or were likely to be ineffective at mitigating those risks. nevertheless, many participants noted that the current knowledge of the interactions between the stance of monetary policy and financial vulnerabilities is too imprecise to warrant systematically adjusting monetary policy in response to the evolution of financial stability risks. as a result, monetary policy should be guided primarily by the outlook for employment and inflation, and it should respond to financial stability risks only insofar as such risks significantly threaten the achievement of the committee’s mandate. several participants observed that the monetary policy measures needed to curb financial stability risks could be quite large, and the resulting effects on employment and inflation could place a high hurdle for such measures. some participants remarked that, because financial stability risks are a consideration for achieving the committee’s dual mandate, a clear communications strategy would be needed to convey the committee’s assessments of financial vulnerabilities and their potential implications for the monetary policy outlook. several participants noted that a communications strategy could include the possible use of financial instability escape clauses to help explain the rationale for policy actions when a buildup of financial vulnerabilities poses risks to the achievement of the committee’s goals. the staff’s briefing on considerations regarding the use of an inflation range focused on three different concepts of an inflation range. first, an uncertainty range could communicate the magnitude of the inherent variability of inflation that would still be consistent with achieving the committee’s symmetric inflation objective. second, an operational range could signal that, under some conditions, the committee would prefer inflation to be away from its longer-run objective for a time; such a range could potentially be used as part of a makeup policy strategy, including one based on average inflation targeting, or in other strategies aimed at offsetting the adverse  page 10 federal open market committee effects of a binding effective lower bound on policy rates. third, an indifference range could communicate that monetary policy would not respond to deviations of inflation within that range. the briefing also summarized the experiences of foreign central banks that use inflation ranges; these ranges were typically put in place many years ago, often in conjunction with adopting an inflation target. the staff highlighted the communications challenges that could arise if an inflation range were introduced at a time when inflation had been running below the central bank’s objective for a number of years. in this environment, the introduction of a symmetric range around the point objective could be misinterpreted as a sign that the central bank was not concerned about inflation remaining below its stated goal, a situation that could lead to inflation expectations drifting down to the lower end of the range. participants expressed a range of views on the potential benefits and costs of different types of inflation ranges. most participants expressed concern that introducing a symmetric inflation range around the 2 percent objective following an extended period of inflation mostly running somewhat below 2 percent could be misperceived as a signal that the committee was comfortable with continued misses below its symmetric inflation objective. many participants agreed that an uncertainty range could be misinterpreted as an indifference range and hence as a lack of commitment by the committee to its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. some participants suggested that it was not clear that introducing a range would help much in achieving the committee’s inflation objective; they noted that introducing a range could make that objective less clear to the public. instead of establishing a range, the committee could continue to communicate that its inflation objective was symmetric around 2 percent. while inflation is inherently variable, the committee then could emphasize its intention for inflation to be centered on the 2 percent objective. nevertheless, in view of the inherent variability of inflation, several participants judged that there could be some benefit in communicating the inflation objective with a symmetric range around the point target. in addition, a few participants suggested that an inflation range could convey the uncertainty associated with the available array of inflation measures or that the committee’s communications could more explicitly reference other measures of inflation. several participants also stated that employing an asymmetric operational range for a time—with 2 percent being at or near the lower end of that range—while still maintaining the longer-run target of 2 percent could help communicate that the committee intended inflation to average 2 percent over time, which in turn could help keep longer-run inflation expectations at levels consistent with its objective. participants expected that, at upcoming meetings, they would continue their deliberations on the committee’s review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. participants continued to anticipate that the review will likely be completed around the middle of this year. developments in financial markets and open market operations the soma manager reviewed developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. for most of the period, risk asset prices rose as market participants focused on a perceived reduction in downside risks to the economic outlook, favorable data on foreign economic activity, and expectations of continued monetary policy accommodation in the united states and other major economies. some market participants suggested that the federal reserve’s actions in the fourth quarter to maintain ample reserve levels might have contributed to some degree to the rise in equity and other risk asset prices. over the final few days of the intermeeting period, financial markets responded to news of the spread of the coronavirus that started in china, which reportedly contributed to downward moves in treasury yields and, to a lesser extent, u.s. equity prices. on balance, u.s. financial conditions became more accommodative over the intermeeting period, with equity prices rising notably. despite signs of reduced risks to the outlook and of some stabilization in economic activity abroad, financial market participants’ views on the likely course of u.s. monetary policy appeared to have changed little over the intermeeting period. market-based indicators continued to point to expectations that the target range for the federal funds rate will be lowered by roughly 30 basis points this year. this was consistent with responses to the open market desk’s survey, which continued to indicate that, while market participants viewed no change this year in the target range as the most likely outcome, they placed a higher probability on a reduction in the target range over the year than on an increase. market commentary attributed the stability in federal funds rate expectations despite the perceived reduction in downside risks partly to the committee’s communications; some market participants reportedly regarded those communications as signaling a relatively high bar for changes to the target range. in addition, results from the  minutes of the meeting of january 28–29, 2020 page 11 desk’s surveys suggested that, notwithstanding the abatement in some risks over recent months, many market participants continued to see risks to the economic outlook as skewed to the downside. the manager turned next to a review of money market developments and desk operations. the federal funds rate was stable over the year-end date and remained close to the interest on excess reserves (ioer) rate. ongoing reserve management purchases of treasury bills and the desk’s repurchase agreement (repo) operations kept aggregate reserves above the level that prevailed in early september, contributing to relatively calm money market conditions around year-end. market participants cited funding from the additional longer-term repo operations spanning year-end and increased capacity in daily operations as helping to maintain stable conditions in short-term funding markets. in addition, market participants prepared earlier than usual for year-end, with borrowers increasing their term borrowing from private lenders and lenders apparently expanding their lending capacity. since year-end, money market rates remained stable, with the desk’s longer-term repos maturing with no discernible effect on market conditions and reserve management purchases of treasury bills proceeding smoothly. at the current pace of $60 billion per month, the staff’s estimates suggested that after april of this year, the desk’s reserve management purchases will restore the permanent base of reserves to levels above those prevailing in early september 2019. although reserves are projected to be above $1.5 trillion before april, a surge in the treasury general account balance during the april tax season is expected to briefly reduce reserve levels and, in the absence of repo operations, bring reserves down temporarily to around $1.5 trillion. the manager discussed a potential plan for gradually transitioning to an operational approach designed to maintain ample reserve levels without the active use of repo operations to supply reserves. under this plan, repo operations would be maintained at least through april to ensure ample reserve conditions. however, the desk would continue the gradual reduction and consolidation of its repo offerings ahead of april, with the plan of phasing out term repo operations after april. as part of this transition, the minimum bid rate on repo operations could be gradually lifted, and the committee could consider whether there is a role for repo operations in the implementation framework. in the second quarter, the manager expected reserve conditions to support slowing the pace of treasury bill purchases, with the goal of eventually aligning growth of the federal reserve’s treasury holdings with trend growth in its liabilities. as that time approaches, the committee might wish to consider the appropriate maturity composition of reserve management purchases of treasury securities. the manager noted that, although the pace of treasury purchases would likely continue into the second quarter, the rate of expansion in the federal reserve’s balance sheet would moderate during the first half of 2020 as repo outstanding was gradually reduced. the manager’s briefing addressed the possibility of a small technical adjustment to the federal reserve’s administered rates in light of the stability in money market conditions over recent months. with this adjustment, the board would lift the interest rates on required and excess reserves by 5 basis points, and the fomc would implement an equal-sized upward adjustment to the overnight reverse repurchase agreement offer rate. this technical adjustment would reverse the small downward adjustment to administered rates made in september, when money markets were volatile. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. no intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available for the january 28–29 meeting indicated that labor market conditions remained strong and that real gross domestic product (gdp) increased at a moderate rate in the fourth quarter of 2019. consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce), remained below 2 percent in november. survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed. total nonfarm payroll employment rose in december, and the solid pace of job gains over the second half of 2019 was somewhat above that for the first half. however, the rate of increase in payrolls in 2019 was slower than in 2018, whether or not one accounted for the anticipated effects of the bureau of labor statistics’ benchmark revision to payroll employment, which was scheduled for early february. the unemployment rate held steady at its 50-year low of 3.5 percent in december, and the labor force participation rate and the employmentto-population ratio were unchanged as well. the unemployment rates for african americans, asians, hispanics, and whites were below their levels at the end of the  page 12 federal open market committee previous economic expansion. although persistent differentials between these rates remained, they have generally narrowed during the expansion. the average share of workers employed part time for economic reasons in november stayed below its level in late 2007. the rate of private-sector job openings declined, on net, in october and november but was still at a fairly high level; the rate of quits, which was also at a high level, edged up. the four-week moving average of initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits through mid-january remained near historically low levels. nominal wage growth was moderate, with average hourly earnings for all employees increasing 2.9 percent over the 12 months ending in december. total consumer prices, as measured by the pce price index, increased 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending in november. core pce price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) was 1.6 percent over that same 12-month period. consumer food price inflation was lower than core inflation, and consumer energy prices declined. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas remained at 2 percent in november. the consumer price index (cpi) and the core cpi both rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in december. recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed, on balance, in recent months. the university of michigan surveys of consumers’ measure for the next 5 to 10 years moved back up in early january after having fallen to its lowest value on record in december. meanwhile, the 3-year-ahead measure from the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations remained near its historical low in december. real pce appeared to have risen more slowly in the fourth quarter than in the third quarter. retail sales were soft during the fourth quarter, and sales of light motor vehicles declined in december after a strong gain in november. however, key factors that influence consumer spending—including the low unemployment rate, the upward trend in real disposable income, high levels of households’ net worth, and generally low interest rates— remained supportive of solid real pce growth in the near term. in addition, recent readings on consumer confidence from both the university of michigan and the conference board surveys were strong. real residential investment appeared to have increased solidly again in the fourth quarter. starts for single-family homes increased sharply over the november and december period, building permit issuance for such homes rose on net, and starts of multifamily units also moved up. existing home sales increased, on balance, in november and december, while new home sales declined. all told, the data on residential construction and sales continued to suggest that the decline in mortgage rates since late 2018 had been boosting housing activity. the available data pointed to another decline in real nonresidential private fixed investment in the fourth quarter, with a further contraction in structures investment more than offsetting a modest rise in investment in equipment and intangibles. nominal shipments and new orders of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft were little changed in the fourth quarter. although some measures of business sentiment improved, analysts’ expectations of firms’ longer-term profit growth edged down further, concerns about trade developments continued to weigh on firms’ investment decisions, and reduced deliveries of the boeing 737 max were likely restraining investment. nominal business expenditures for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector continued to decline in november. the total number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—was little changed, on net, through mid-january, though still below levels seen over the latter part of 2019. industrial production (ip) increased, on net, in november and december, partly because of a pickup in motor vehicle production following the strike at general motors. even so, ip was lower than a year earlier, with declines in manufacturing production and the output of utilities only partly offset by an increase in mining output. automakers’ schedules suggested that assemblies of light motor vehicles would increase in the first quarter, but that gain appeared likely to be offset by boeing’s curtailed production of the 737 max aircraft and, more generally, by mixed readings on new orders from national and regional manufacturing surveys. total real government purchases appeared to have increased moderately in the fourth quarter. nominal defense spending in november and december pointed to only a moderate rise in real federal government purchases. real purchases by state and local governments looked to have risen a little faster than in the third quarter; nominal construction spending by these governments increased solidly in november, and state and local payrolls expanded modestly in december. real net exports were estimated to have provided a substantial boost to real gdp growth in the fourth quarter.  minutes of the meeting of january 28–29, 2020 page 13 available monthly data suggested that imports fell significantly, led by declines in consumer goods and automobiles, while exports were about flat. implied by overnight index swap quotes, moved down slightly, on net, and implied about a 30 basis point decline in the federal funds rate from its current level. incoming data suggested that foreign economic growth slowed further in the fourth quarter to a very subdued pace. in the advanced foreign economies (afes), growth appeared to have remained weak as the manufacturing slump continued and a consumption tax hike in japan led to a sharp contraction in household spending. in the emerging economies, social unrest weighed heavily on economic activity in hong kong and chile, while the labor strike at general motors was a further drag on mexico’s already weak economy. in contrast, early gdp releases showed a pickup in growth in china and some other asian economies, though news of the coronavirus outbreak raised questions about the sustainability of that pickup. foreign inflation rose in the wake of temporary factors in india and china, while it remained soft in most afes, in part reflecting previous declines in energy prices and muted core inflation pressures. yields on nominal treasury securities declined, on net, across the maturity spectrum over the intermeeting period, while the spread between the yields on nominal 10- and 2-year treasury securities was little changed. measures of inflation compensation over the next 5 years and 5 to 10 years ahead based on treasury inflation-protected securities decreased, on net, but remained above their october 2019 lows. staff review of the financial situation investor sentiment improved, on balance, over the intermeeting period, mostly reflecting progress related to the phase-one trade deal between the united states and china and its subsequent signing, the perception that the probability of a disorderly brexit had declined, signs of stabilization in the global economic outlook, and, reportedly, continued confidence that monetary policy in the united states and other major economies would remain accommodative in the near term. late in the period, concerns about the spread of the coronavirus and uncertainty about its potential economic effect weighed negatively on investor sentiment and led to moderate declines in the prices of risky assets. on net, equity prices increased notably over the intermeeting period, while corporate bond spreads were little changed and yields on nominal treasury securities declined. financing conditions for businesses and households eased a bit further and generally remained supportive of spending and economic activity. federal reserve communications over the intermeeting period reportedly reinforced investors’ beliefs that a near-term change to the target range for the federal funds rate was unlikely. consistent with those reports, a straight read of the probability distributions for the federal funds rate implied by options prices suggested that investors assigned a high probability to the target range remaining unchanged over the next few months. expectations for the federal funds rate at the end of 2020, as broad stock price indexes increased notably, on balance, over the intermeeting period, with gains largely attributed to improved market sentiment about trade negotiations and a perceived lower probability of a disorderly brexit. late in the period, equity prices retraced some of their gains, as concerns about the spread of the coronavirus weighed negatively on risk sentiment. overall movements in stock prices varied widely across economic sectors, with stocks of firms in the information technology and utilities sectors significantly outperforming aggregate indexes, while stock prices of firms in the energy sector declined markedly. optionimplied volatility on the s&p 500 index increased a bit, on balance, while corporate credit spreads were little changed. conditions in domestic short-term funding markets, including in secured financing, were stable over the intermeeting period, even over year-end. rates declined slightly, likely reflecting increased liquidity and a higher level of reserves provided by the desk’s open market operations. the effective federal funds rate remained close to the ioer rate, and spreads for term unsecured commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit narrowed substantially, particularly after year-end. the desk’s open market operations proceeded smoothly. for most of the intermeeting period, foreign equity prices rose amid progress on u.s.–china trade negotiations, generally favorable data on global economic activity, and the reduced risk of a disorderly brexit following the u.k. general election. late in the period, however, concerns about the coronavirus outbreak in china weighed on risk sentiment. on balance, most major foreign equity indexes increased modestly, and afe longterm sovereign yields ended the period somewhat lower. u.k. and canadian yields declined more than elsewhere against the backdrop of central bank communications that were interpreted as increasing the likelihood of policy easing in those countries.  page 14 federal open market committee the broad dollar index weakened slightly over the period, predominantly against emerging market currencies. the chinese renminbi appreciated notably against the dollar on positive trade policy developments, but this gain was more than undone late in the period by concerns about the coronavirus. the mexican peso strengthened against the dollar, supported by progress on the u.s.-mexico-canada agreement (usmca) and bank of mexico communications that were perceived as less accommodative than expected. financing conditions for nonfinancial firms remained accommodative, on balance, with corporate borrowing costs staying near historical lows during the intermeeting period. gross issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds was subdued in january and december after surging in november. issuance of speculative-grade bonds over the intermeeting period remained about in line with the average pace over december and january in recent years. institutional leveraged loan issuance continued to be robust in december, reflecting solid refinancing activity and moderate new money issuance. meanwhile, commercial and industrial (c&i) loans on banks’ balance sheets contracted in the fourth quarter. respondents to the january 2020 senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos) reported that borrower demand weakened for c&i loans over the fourth quarter, and lending standards on such loans were little changed. gross equity issuance through seasoned offerings remained robust in december, while initial public offerings continued to be quite light. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations and the earnings outlook remained generally stable in recent months. credit conditions for both small businesses and municipalities remained accommodative on net. in the commercial real estate (cre) sector, financing conditions also remained generally accommodative. the volume of agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities issuance grew notably in the fourth quarter, buoyed by lower interest rates, and the growth of cre loans on banks’ books picked up over this period. responses to the january 2020 sloos suggested that lending standards and demand for most cre loan categories were unchanged in the fourth quarter. financing conditions in the residential mortgage market remained accommodative on balance. mortgage rates decreased notably during the intermeeting period, reaching recent-year lows. home-purchase originations remained around post-crisis highs, and mortgage refinancing activity continued at a strong pace through december. financing conditions in consumer credit markets remained supportive of growth in consumer spending, although the supply of credit remained relatively tight for nonprime borrowers. the growth of credit card balances slowed in the fourth quarter, and, according to the january sloos, commercial banks tightened their standards on credit card loans over this period. auto loan growth maintained a solid pace in recent months amid declining interest rates through year-end. the staff provided an update on its assessments of potential risks to financial stability. on balance, the financial vulnerabilities of the u.s. financial system were characterized as moderate. the staff judged that asset valuation pressures had increased in recent months to an elevated level. asset valuation pressures were characterized as fairly widespread across a number of markets, similar to the situation in much of 2017 and 2018. in assessing vulnerabilities stemming from borrowing in the household and business sectors, the staff noted that, while the ratio of household debt to nominal gdp was fairly low, the ratio of business debt to nominal gdp was high by historical standards. at the same time, major financial institutions were viewed as resilient, in part because of high levels of capital at banks. nonetheless, the staff noted that banks had announced that they intend to allow their capital ratios to decline closer to regulatory requirements over the medium term. vulnerabilities stemming from funding risk were characterized as moderate. while the money market strains in september raised some questions about vulnerabilities in funding markets, the staff assessed that the core of the financial system remains resilient to vulnerabilities from maturity and liquidity transformation. staff economic outlook the projection for u.s. real gdp growth prepared by the staff for the january fomc meeting was stronger than in the previous forecast. data pertaining to the fourth quarter of 2019, particularly on imports, suggested output rose faster at the end of the year than was previously projected, and this faster pace seemed consistent with the solid employment gains in the fourth quarter. in addition, more supportive financial conditions and the anticipated effects of the phase-one trade deal between the united states and china pushed up the staff’s gdp forecast for this year and next. all told, real gdp growth was projected to be about the same in 2020 as in 2019 and then to slow modestly in the coming years, partly because of a fading boost from fiscal policy. output was forecast to expand at a rate a little above the staff’s estimate of its potential rate of growth in 2020 and 2021 and then to slow to a pace slightly below potential  minutes of the meeting of january 28–29, 2020 page 15 output growth in 2022. the unemployment rate was projected to decline a little further this year and to remain at that lower level through 2022; the unemployment rate was anticipated to be below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate throughout the forecast period. the staff’s forecasts for both total and core pce price inflation over the 2020–22 period were essentially unrevised. core inflation was still projected to step up a little in 2020 but to run a bit below 2 percent both this year and over the next two years. total pce price inflation was projected to be a little lower than core inflation in 2020 because of a projected decline in consumer energy prices and to be the same as core inflation in 2021 and 2022. the staff continued to view the uncertainty around its projections for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as generally similar to the average of the past 20 years. the staff viewed the downside risks to economic activity as having diminished a bit further since the previous forecast but still judged that the risks to the forecast for real gdp growth were tilted to the downside, with a corresponding skew to the upside for the unemployment rate. important factors influencing this assessment were that foreign economic and geopolitical developments still seemed more likely to move in directions that could have significant negative effects on the u.s. economy than to resolve more favorably than assumed. in addition, softness in business investment and manufacturing production last year, as well as the recent weakness in imports, was seen as pointing to the possibility of a more substantial slowing in economic growth than the staff projected. the risks to the inflation projection were also viewed as having a downward skew, in part because of the downside risks to the forecast for economic activity. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook participants agreed that the labor market had remained strong over the intermeeting period and that economic activity had risen at a moderate rate. job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. although household spending had risen at a moderate pace, business fixed investment and exports had remained weak. on a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 percent. market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed. participants generally judged that the current stance of monetary policy was appropriate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to the committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. they expected economic growth to continue at a moderate pace, supported by accommodative monetary and financial conditions. in addition, some trade uncertainties had diminished recently, and there were some signs of stabilization in global growth. nonetheless, uncertainties about the outlook remained, including those posed by the outbreak of the coronavirus. in their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that spending growth had moderated in the fourth quarter. however, they generally expected that, in the period ahead, consumption spending would likely remain on a firm footing, supported by strong labor market conditions, rising incomes, and healthy household balance sheets. some participants noted the upbeat tone of consumer surveys, and a few commented that their district contacts had reported solid retail sales during the holiday shopping season. in addition, many participants were encouraged by the significant pickup since last summer in residential investment, a development that reflected, in part, the effects of lower mortgage rates. with respect to the business sector, participants observed that business investment and exports remained weak and that manufacturing output had declined over the past year. looking ahead, participants were generally cautiously optimistic about the effects on the business sector of the recent favorable trade developments and the signs of stabilization in global growth. many participants expressed the view that these developments might boost business confidence or raise export demand, which would help strengthen or at least stabilize business investment. a few participants remarked that contacts in their districts had noted that business sentiment was brighter or that companies were intending to expand their capital expenditures this year. several other participants, however, judged that the effect of the recent trade agreement with china would be relatively limited, as trade uncertainty would likely remain elevated, with the possibility remaining of the emergence of new tensions as well as the reescalation of existing tensions. they noted that the agreement would still leave a large portion of tariffs in place and that many firms had already been making production and supply chain adjustments in response to trade tensions.  page 16 federal open market committee participants also commented on ongoing challenges facing the energy and agriculture sectors. a couple of participants remarked that activity in the energy sector continued to be weak, and a few noted that financial conditions in the agricultural sector would likely remain challenging for many despite farm subsidies from the federal government and recent optimism surrounding trade prospects. participants judged that conditions in the labor market remained strong, with the unemployment rate at a 50-year low and continued solid job gains, on average. although the upcoming annual benchmark revision was expected to reduce estimates of recent payroll growth, participants expected payroll employment to expand at a healthy pace this year. business contacts in many districts indicated continued strong labor demand, with several participants mentioning that contacts reported difficulties in finding qualified workers or that observed wage growth might currently understate the degree of tightness in the labor market. however, a number of participants indicated that aggregate measures of nominal wages continued to rise at a moderate pace broadly in line with productivity growth and the rate of inflation. several participants commented on potential reasons for the absence of stronger broad-based wage pressures, including technological changes that could substitute for labor, increased willingness of employees to forgo wage gains for greater job stability, adjustments in nonwage portions of compensation packages, and the possibility that the labor market was not as tight as the historically low unemployment rate would suggest. many participants pointed to the strong performance of labor force participation despite the downward pressures associated with an aging population, and several raised the possibility that there was some room for labor force participation to rise further. in their discussion of inflation developments, participants noted that recent readings on overall and core pce price inflation, measured on a 12-month basis, had continued to run below 2 percent. overall, participants described their inflation outlook as having changed little since december. participants generally expected inflation to move closer to 2 percent in the coming months as the unusually low readings in early 2019 drop out of the 12-month calculation. participants also expected that, as the economic expansion continues and resource utilization remains high, inflation would return to the 2 percent objective on a sustainable basis. a few participants expressed less confidence in this outlook for inflation and commented that inflation had averaged less than 2 percent over the past several years even as resource utilization had increased, or pointed to downward pressures from global or technology-related factors that could continue to suppress inflation. a couple of participants, however, noted that some alternative inflation indicators, including trimmed mean measures, suggested that there had been a modest step-up in underlying inflation during 2019 or that underlying inflation could already be at a level consistent with the committee’s goal. participants generally saw the distribution of risks to the outlook for economic activity as somewhat more favorable than at the previous meeting, although a number of downside risks remained prominent. the easing of trade tensions resulting from the recent agreement with china and the passage of the usmca as well as tentative signs of stabilization in global economic growth helped reduce downside risks and appeared to buoy business sentiment. the risk of a “hard” brexit had appeared to recede further. in addition, statistical models designed to estimate the probability of recession using financial market data suggested that the likelihood of a recession occurring over the next year had fallen notably in recent months. still, participants generally expected trade-related uncertainty to remain somewhat elevated, and they were mindful of the possibility that the tentative signs of stabilization in global growth could fade. geopolitical risks, especially in connection with the middle east, remained. the threat of the coronavirus, in addition to its human toll, had emerged as a new risk to the global growth outlook, which participants agreed warranted close watching. in their discussion of financial stability, participants acknowledged the staff report suggesting that overall financial vulnerabilities remained moderate and that the financial system remained resilient. nonetheless, several participants observed that equity, corporate debt, and cre valuations were elevated and drew attention to high levels of corporate indebtedness and weak underwriting standards in leveraged loan markets. some participants expressed the concern that financial imbalances—including overvaluation and excessive indebtedness— could amplify an adverse shock to the economy, that the current conditions of low interest rates and labor market tightness could increase risks to financial stability, or that cyber attacks could affect the u.s. financial system. several participants noted that planned increases in dividend payouts by large banks and the associated decline in capital buffers might leave those banks with less capacity to weather adverse shocks—which could have negative implications for the economy—or that lower bank capital  minutes of the meeting of january 28–29, 2020 page 17 ratios could be associated with greater tail risks to gdp growth. on the other hand, capital levels at u.s. banks were quite high relative to other sectors of the financial system, raising questions about the potential migration of lending activities away from the u.s. banking sector to areas outside the oversight of federal banking supervisors. in their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants judged that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to the committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. with regard to monetary policy beyond this meeting, participants viewed the current stance of policy as likely to remain appropriate for a time, provided that incoming information about the economy remained broadly consistent with this economic outlook. of course, if developments emerged that led to a material reassessment of the outlook, an adjustment to the stance of monetary policy would be appropriate, in order to foster achievement of the committee’s dual-mandate objectives. in commenting on the monetary policy outlook, participants concurred that maintaining the current stance of policy would give the committee time for a fuller assessment of the ongoing effects on economic activity of last year’s shift to a more accommodative policy stance and would also allow policymakers to accumulate further information bearing on the economic outlook. participants discussed how maintaining the current policy stance for a time could be helpful in supporting u.s. economic activity and employment in the face of global developments that have been weighing on spending decisions. with regard to the committee’s price-stability objective, participants observed that the current degree of monetary policy accommodation would be useful in facilitating a return of inflation to 2 percent. several participants noted that inflation returning to 2 percent would help ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remained consistent with the committee’s longer-run inflation objective. a few participants stressed that the committee should be more explicit about the need to achieve its inflation goal on a sustained basis. several participants suggested that inflation modestly exceeding 2 percent for a period would be consistent with the achievement of the committee’s longer-run inflation objective and that such mild overshooting might underscore the symmetry of that objective. with regard to the committee’s maximum employment objective, a few participants observed that the actual level of employment might still be below maximum employment and that maintaining the present monetary policy stance would allow the economy to achieve that maximum level. a couple of other participants expressed concern that tight labor markets have in the past been associated with economic and financial imbalances and that the emergence of such imbalances might jeopardize the longer-run attainment of the committee’s dual-mandate goals. participants discussed the open market operations that the federal reserve had undertaken since september to implement monetary policy, as well as forthcoming operational measures. participants agreed that the operations undertaken by the desk since mid-september had been effective in helping to stabilize conditions in money markets and that implementation of the plan that the committee announced in october to purchase treasury bills and conduct repo operations had proceeded smoothly. participants observed that enactment of this plan had succeeded in replenishing reserve balances to levels at or above those prevailing in early september 2019 and in ensuring continued control of the federal funds rate. many participants stressed that, as reserves approached durably ample levels, the need for sizable treasury bill purchases and repo operations would diminish and that such operations could be gradually scaled back or phased out. beyond that point, regular open market operations would be required over time in order to accommodate the trend growth in the federal reserve’s liabilities and maintain an ample level of reserves. participants who commented on the desk’s proposal for the transition to the ample-reserves regime indicated that they were comfortable with that proposal. they remarked that the details of the committee’s plans would be adjusted as appropriate to support effective implementation of monetary policy. participants noted that it would be important to continue to communicate to the public that open market operations now and in the period ahead were technical operations aimed at achieving and maintaining ample reserves and that any adjustments to those operations were not intended to represent a change in the stance of monetary policy. several participants suggested that the committee should resume before long its discussion of the role that repo operations might play in an ample-reserves regime, including the possible creation of a standing repo facility. a couple of these participants cited the potential for such a facility to reduce the banking system’s demand for reserves over the longer term.  page 18 federal open market committee committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members noted that information received since the fomc met in december indicated that the labor market remained strong and that economic activity had been rising at a moderate rate. job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. although household spending had been rising at a moderate pace, business fixed investment and exports remained weak. on a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 percent. market-based measures of inflation compensation remained low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed. members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent. members judged that the current stance of monetary policy was appropriate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to the committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. members also agreed that, in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the committee would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. and they concurred that this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. with regard to the postmeeting statement, members agreed that incoming data warranted a change in the statement’s description of recent rises in household spending from “strong” to “moderate.” they also agreed to describe the current monetary policy stance as consistent with inflation “returning to,” rather than being “near,” their symmetric 2 percent longer-run objective. in commenting on this change in wording, a few members noted that the new language would make the postmeeting statement more consistent with the committee’s outlook or might usefully affirm the symmetry of the committee’s inflation goal and indicate that policymakers were not satisfied with inflation outcomes that were persistently below 2 percent. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective january 30, 2020, the federal open market committee directs the desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1½ to 1¾ percent. in light of recent and expected increases in the federal reserve’s non-reserve liabilities, the committee directs the desk to continue purchasing treasury bills at least into the second quarter of 2020 to maintain over time ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early september 2019. the committee also directs the desk to continue conducting term and overnight repurchase agreement operations at least through april 2020 to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of sharp increases in non-reserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation. in addition, the committee directs the desk to conduct overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 1.50 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of treasury securities held outright in the system open market account that are available for such operations and by a percounterparty limit of $30 billion per day. the committee directs the desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and to continue reinvesting all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities received during each calendar month. principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month will continue to be reinvested in treasury securities to roughly match the maturity composition of treasury securities outstanding; principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month will continue to be reinvested in agency mortgage-backed securities. small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are acceptable. the committee also directs the desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal  minutes of the meeting of january 28–29, 2020 page 19 reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “information received since the federal open market committee met in december indicates that the labor market remains strong and that economic activity has been rising at a moderate rate. job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. although household spending has been rising at a moderate pace, business fixed investment and exports remain weak. on a 12‑month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are running below 2 percent. market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low; surveybased measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. consistent with its statutory mandate, the committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. the committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1½ to 1¾ percent. the committee judges that the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate to support sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to the committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including global developments and muted inflation pressures, as it assesses the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate. in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. this assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, patrick harker, robert s. kaplan, neel kashkari, loretta j. mester, and randal k. quarles. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances to 1.60 percent. setting the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances 10 basis points above the bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate is intended to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the fomc’s target range. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 2.25 percent, effective january 30, 2020. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, march 17–18, 2020. the meeting adjourned at 9:50 a.m. on january 29, 2020. notation vote by notation vote completed on january 2, 2020, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on december 10–11, 2019.  james a. clouse secretary 
arch 3, 2020 chair powell. earlier today the federal open market committee announced a ½ percentage point reduction in the target range for the federal funds rate, bringing that range to 1 to 1¼ percent. my colleagues and i took this action to help the u.s. economy keep strong in the face of new risks to the economic outlook. the fundamentals of the u.s. economy remain strong. the unemployment rate has been near half-century lows for well more than a year, the pace of job gains has been solid, and wages have been rising. these strong labor market conditions have underpinned solid household spending, which has been the key driver of economic growth over the past year. at the time of our fomc meeting in january, prospects for continued economic growth remained favorable, and we judged that monetary policy was well positioned to support that outlook. since then, the spread of the coronavirus has brought new challenges and risks. the virus has afflicted many communities around the world, and our thoughts and prayers go out to those who’ve been harmed. the outbreak has also disrupted economic activity in many countries and has prompted significant movements in financial markets. the virus and the measures that are being taken to contain it will surely weigh on economic activity both here and abroad for some time. we are beginning to see the effects on the tourism and travel industries, and we are hearing concerns from industries that rely on global supply chains. the magnitude and persistence of the overall effects on the economy, however, remain highly uncertain, and the situation remains a fluid one. against this background, the committee judged that the risks to the u.s. outlook have changed materially. in response, we have eased the stance of monetary policy to provide some more support to the economy. of course, the ultimate solutions to this challenge will come from  others, particularly health professionals. we can and will do our part, however, to keep the u.s. economy strong as we meet this challenge. as always, our actions are guided by our congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. in the weeks and months ahead, we will continue to closely monitor developments and their implications for the economic outlook, and we will use our tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. thank you, and i’ll be happy to take a few questions. nick timiraos. thank you. nick timiraos with the wall street journal. two questions. first, what changed between last week, when many of your colleagues seemed to indicate it was still too soon to tell how this might influence the outlook—what changed between last week and today? and then, how much confidence do you have that there will be a quick and relatively complete recovery of economic activity after the peak of this virus has passed? chair powell. so, what changed? of course, we’ve been carefully monitoring the situation since it first became known and waiting to see how it would evolve. and i think we’ve come to the view now that this—that it is time for us to act in support of the economy. and once you reach that decision, we decided to go ahead. so what changed, really, was, i would say, over the course of the last couple weeks, we’ve seen a broader spread of the virus—we’ve seen it begin to spread a bit here in the united states. but, for us, what really matters, of course, is not the epidemiology, but the risk to the economy. so we saw a risk to the outlook for the economy and chose to act. in terms of my confidence that we will return to—what was your question? was that a question? nick timiraos. how do you expect this to—the economy to recover from this? do you see it as a persistent decline in activity or something that will be relatively temporary and short lived?  chair powell. i don’t think anybody knows how long it will be. i do know that the u.s. economy is strong, and we will get to the other side of this. and i fully expect it will return to solid growth and a solid labor market as well. jim tankersley. hi, mr. chairman. jim tankersley, new york times. you said that “the ultimate solutions” will come from others, and i have two questions about that. first, is this a coordinated—part of a coordinated action with other central banks, and should we be expecting to see more as part of that? and, second, what would you like to see from american fiscal policymakers in response to these new threats? chair powell. okay. so, first question. we—we’re in active discussions with central banks around the world on an ongoing basis, as you would guess. i’ve been in regular contact with central bank leaders from around the world. that will continue. central banks are doing what makes sense in their particular institutional contexts, but we’re all talking to each other on an ongoing basis. and our action today represents what we think is the right policy for us in our particular institutional context under our domestic mandate. you saw this morning’s g-7 statement of finance ministers and governors, and i think that statement does reflect coordination at a high level in the form of a commitment to use all available tools, including health-care policy, fiscal policy, and monetary policy as “appropriate.” so, in terms of fiscal policy, again, not our role. we have—we have a full plate with monetary policy. not our role to give advice to the fiscal policymakers, but you saw the mention in the g-7 statement—as “appropriate” as well. heather scott. the g-7—heather scott with afp. the g-7 statement seemed to indicate that—i’m sorry. i was away from the mic. sorry, heather scott with afp. the g-7 statement seemed to indicate that—that policymakers would use tools but were not going to do  anything imminent. does this contradict that, or is this in keeping with the action—the statement by the g-7 this morning? and, can i ask, what would cause you to make—take another step? what would you be looking for, in terms of the economic outlook or data? chair powell. so the sense of the g-7, you know, is to—we have seven countries, obviously, and different policies, different situations, different mandates—a lot of overlap. and the sense of that is to get together as a group and say at a high level that “these are the things we’re going to do. we are going to use our tools—all of our tools in a strong way to—to try to support the economy.” so that’s a statement of general support. i think within that you will see actions. you’ve seen our action. and i think it’s up to individual countries—individual fiscal policies and individual central banks—to do what they’re going to do. i would think it will be— it’s possible there will be some more—more formal considered coordination as we move forward. in terms of—in terms of moving forward, i would say that we do like our current policy stance. we think—we think it’s appropriate to—to support achievement of our dual-mandate goals. but as i said in my—in my statement, we’re prepared to use our tools—tools and act appropriately, depending on the flow of events. heather scott. but anything you’ll be particularly watching that would change that? chair powell. i can’t point to any one thing. it’s always a range of things. heather long. heather long from the washington post. there’s been some rising concern about credit markets and possible insolvencies and defaults either from businesses or individuals from the coronavirus. can you speak to—is the fomc talking about this? are we  likely to see any emergency provisions from the cra activated or things that you normally do during, you know, a hurricane or that type of disruption to the economy? chair powell. so we don’t—we don’t see any of that happening yet. of course, we are—we are thinking about what we can do should those things happen. there’s no evidence of it yet. the economy continues to perform well—perform well. as i mentioned, we do hear concerns, particularly from those most directly exposed, but there’s nothing in that nature: financial markets are functioning in an orderly manner and all that sort of thing. i think when it—when it comes to those sorts of issues, though, we will be—the supervisors will be working with banks to assure that they work with their—with their borrowers and that sort of thing. so i can imagine us doing those sorts of things, but it’s—those things are not upon us at the moment. brendan greeley. thank you. brendan greeley, financial times. has the committee discussed any other monetary policy tools, in addition to rate cuts, and the pacing and timing of when they might be appropriate? chair powell. well, as you know, we’re in the middle of a review of all of our tools. so if you go back a few meetings, we’ve talked about what our toolkit is, and we’ve put that in the minutes. but in the current context, no. what we discussed is the current stance of policy, is it appropriate—came to the view that it was appropriate to make a change and went ahead and did that today. rich miller. hi. rich miller with bloomberg. thank you very much for having a press conference. can you take us a little—through the reasoning behind the rate cut a little bit more in depth? you know, was there a discuss—some economists say this is a supply-side shock, you know, rate cuts are not particularly suitable for this. others say, well, the supply  shock may morph into a demand shock. i wonder if you could just give us a little bit more depth on the reasoning behind the rate cut. thank you. chair powell. sure, i’d be glad to. so the virus outbreak is something that will require a multifaceted response. and that response will come, in the first instance, from health- care professionals and health policy experts. it will also come from fiscal authorities should they determine that a response is appropriate. and it would be—come from many other public- and private-sector actors: businesses, schools, state and local governments. but there’s also a role for monetary policy. monetary policy can be an effective tool to support overall economic activity. we do recognize that a rate cut will not reduce the rate of infection. it won’t fix a broken supply chain. we get that. we don’t think we have all the answers. but we do believe that our action will provide a meaningful boost to the economy. more specifically, it will support accommodative financial conditions and avoid a tightening of financial conditions which can weigh on activity, and it will help boost household and business confidence. that’s why you’re seeing central banks around the world responding as they see appropriate in their particular institutional context. ylan mui. thanks. ylan mui from cnbc. can you tell us what you would do if the virus ends up being contained fairly quickly? would you envision the fed actually raising rates in short order if the economic damage doesn’t occur the way that you potentially fear? and i have a second question, which is, president trump was just tweeting about you this morning and talking about the fed’s need to cut rates. did you feel any political pressure to make this move? chair powell. so, on your first question, we’re always going to set monetary policy at a given time in a way that we think best serves our dual-mandate goals, and it’s as simple as that. so, you know, we’ll—if we get to a place where we think it’s an appropriate time to change  the stance of monetary policy, we won’t hesitate to do that. i would also say that it’s—it’s very important that people understand that we will always make our decisions based on the best thinking we have, based on our—what we learned from our outreach to businesses, nonprofits, educational institutions that we get every cycle through the reserve banks, and the best analysis, the best research. we’re always going to make our decisions in the interests of the american people to carry forward and try to achieve the mandates that congress has given us. and we’re never going to consider any political considerations whatsoever. we will not do that, and it’s very important that the public understand that. christopher rugaber. chris rugaber, associated press. i know—you mentioned a little bit of outreach. some of the fed bank presidents were talking about last week how much they were going to listen to their contacts. have you gotten reports sort of from the ground from your business contacts, nonprofits, and so forth that have affected your decisionmaking? what are—what are you hearing from all those folks? thank you. chair powell. so we’re—we are hearing—i would just say, the effects are at a very early stage. but you are hearing concerns from people—for example, in the travel business or the hotel business and things like that. that’s—that’s what you are hearing. but you don’t see things showing up in actual data. you do see them showing up in, sort of, sentiment forecast indicators and things like that. we expect that will continue. it will probably grow. and that’s one of the reasons why we’ve come to the view that it would be appropriate for us today to move to support the economy. and that’s what we’ve done. thanks very much.   NA
ence call march 15, 2020 chair powell. good evening, everyone. today the federal reserve took a number of actions to support american families and business and the economy overall and to promote the flow of credit as we weather disruptions caused by the coronavirus. the virus is having a profound effect on people across the united states and around the world. on behalf of my colleagues at the federal reserve, our first concern is for those who’ve been harmed. families, businesses, schools, organizations, and governments at all levels are taking steps to protect people’s health. these measures, which are essential for containing the outbreak, will nonetheless understandably take a toll on economic activity in the near term. while the primary response to this challenge will come from our health-care providers and policy experts, economic policymakers must do what we can to ease hardship caused by the disruptions to the economy and to support a swift return to normal once they have passed. the federal reserve’s role is guided by our mandate from congress to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. today we reduced the target range for our policy interest rate by 1 percentage point, bringing it close to zero, and said that we expect to maintain the rate at this level until we’re confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. in addition, we took other actions to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. before describing our actions more fully, i will share how my colleagues and i currently view the economic outlook. the economy came into this challenging period on a strong footing. the unemployment rate was 3.5 percent in february and has been at or near half-century lows for almost two years. job gains have been running at a solid pace, well above what is needed to   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final provide jobs for new entrants into the labor market. participation in the labor force by people in their prime working years remained near its highest rate in more than a decade. and wages have been rising, particularly for lower-paying jobs. overall economic activity has been expanding at a moderate rate, even though weak growth abroad and trade developments have been weighing on some sectors. u.s. banks are strong, have high levels of capital and liquidity, and are well positioned to provide credit to households and businesses. against this favorable backdrop, the virus presents significant economic challenges. like others, we expect that the illness and the measures now being put in place to stem its spread will have a significant effect on economic activity in the near term. those in travel, tourism, and hospitality industries are already seeing a sharp drop in business. in addition, the effects of the outbreak are restraining economic activity in many foreign economies, which is causing difficulties for u.s. industries that rely on global supply chains. the weakness abroad will also weigh on our exports for a time. moreover, the energy sector has recently come under stress because of the large drop in global oil prices. inflation, which has continued to run below our symmetric 2 percent objective, will likely be held down this year by the effects of the outbreak. financial conditions have also tightened markedly. the cost of credit has risen for all but the strongest borrowers, and stock markets around the world are down sharply. moreover, the rapidly evolving situation has led to high volatility in financial markets as everyone tries to assess the path ahead. in the past week, several important financial markets, including the market for u.s. treasury securities, have at times shown signs of stress and impaired liquidity. the market for treasury securities is a critical part of the foundation of the global financial system. it is generally the most liquid of all markets and serves as the benchmark by which many other financial assets are valued. it plays an important role in allowing households   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final and firms to earn a safe return and manage their risks. when stresses arise in the treasury market, they can reverberate through the entire financial system and the economy. to prevent this from happening and to support the smooth functioning of the treasury market, we announced today that we will purchase at least $500 billion of treasury securities over the coming months. similar stresses have also emerged in the market for agency mortgage-backed securities, which is closely linked to the treasury market and critically supports the ability of people to get a mortgage to buy a house or refinance an existing mortgage. to improve the functioning of this market and to ensure the effective transmission of monetary policy to borrowers in the economy, we will also purchase at least $200 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities over coming months and immediately cease the runoff of these securities in our portfolio. while the primary purpose of these securities purchases is to restore smooth market functioning so that credit can continue to flow, the purchases will also foster more accommodative financial conditions. the federal reserve announced a number of other actions today to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, thereby promoting our maximum employment and price stability goals. of these, i will highlight two. first, we reduced the interest rate on discount window loans by 1½ percentage points, bringing that rate to ¼ percent. the discount window plays an important role in supporting liquidity and stability in the banking system, and we encourage banks to turn to the discount window to help meet demands for credit from households and businesses. to make the discount window more effective, we will also offer discount window loans for periods up to 90 days. because of the importance of the u.s. dollar in the global economy, strains in markets for borrowing and lending dollars overseas can disrupt financial conditions here in the united states.   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final to guard against such disruptions, the federal reserve maintains swap lines with five major central banks. when dollar funding pressures emerge abroad, those central banks can contain the pressures in their jurisdictions and prevent them from impeding the flow of credit here at home. to address potential pressures in these markets during the current period of elevated uncertainty, we made a coordinated announcement with the bank of canada, the bank of england, the bank of japan, the european central bank, and the swiss national bank to reduce the pricing on our dollar swap lines. in addition, our central bank counterparts will begin offering dollars to institutions in their jurisdictions for a term of 84 days in addition to the usual one-week operation. these long-standing arrangements carry no risk to the federal reserve or to the american taxpayer. i won’t go into detail on the other actions we took today, but they involved eliminating reserve requirements for banks and encouraging banks to make use of intraday credit with the federal reserve and to use their capital and liquidity buffers as they support lending to households and businesses. the actions we have announced today will help american families and businesses and, indeed, our entire economy weather this difficult period and will foster a more vigor—more vigorous return to normal once the disruptions from the coronavirus abate. we will continue to closely monitor economic and financial developments and their implications for the economic outlook. we are prepared to use our full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households and business, to help keep the economy strong, and to promote our maximum employment and price stability goals.   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final finally, let me note that today’s fomc meeting today was in lieu of the meeting scheduled for next tuesday and wednesday. thank you. i’ll be—i’ll be happy to take a few of your questions. michelle smith. the chair will now take some questions. please dial “star 1” on your phone to indicate you want to ask a question. you will be unmuted when you are called on. [extended silence] okay, cnbc. steve liesman. thank you. mr. chairman, how effective do you expect this—these actions to be? do you—do you think a recession is inevitable and/or can be avoided? secondly, there was talk about additional programs that could come out—for example, a primary dealer credit facility or a term auction facility. do you expect those to be announced soon? thank you. chair powell. thank you. so, based on our discussions today and many conversations with participants, it’s fair to say that we have a range of views about the path of the economy, as is always the case with the fed. but, in general, i’d say that we see the u.s. economy as having been in quite a strong position before the arrival of the virus. we see that it is likely that the measures we take to protect ourselves from the virus will involve withdrawing from or reducing certain activities—thinking there of travel, leisure, hospitality, those things— and that’s going to mean lower economic activity for a period of time. these are choices that we make to protect ourselves—appropriate choices that we make to protect ourselves from the virus. so that means that the second quarter is probably going to be weak—in fact, in the view of many, output declining—output lower in the second quarter than it was in the first quarter. after that, it’s very hard to say how big the effects will be or how long they will last. and that’s   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final going to depend, of course, on how widely the virus spreads, which is something that is highly uncertain, and i would say, in fact, unknowable. we do know that the virus will run its course and that the u.s. economy will resume a normal level of activity. in the meantime, the fed will continue to use our tools to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and support demand with monetary policy— ultimately, to do what we can to see that the recovery is as vigorous as possible. you also asked about other facilities. i would point out that we have, of course, responded very strongly not just with interest rates, but also with liquidity measures today. and we believe that what we did today will be beneficial to financial markets generally. and as i said in my statement, we’re prepared to use our full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. thanks. michelle smith. okay, thanks. we’ll go to marketplace radio. nancy marshall-genzer. hi, nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. chair powell, i’m wondering, are you considering negative interest rates at this point? is there a scenario in which you think that would be appropriate? chair powell. so, as i’ve noted on a number of occasions, really, the committee— as you know, we did a year-plus-long study of our tools and strategies and communications. and we, really, at the end of that, and also when we started out, we view forward guidance and asset purchases—asset purchases and also different variations and combinations of those tools as the basic elements of our toolkit once the federal funds rate reaches the effective lower bound— so, really, forward guidance, asset purchases, and combinations of those. you know, we looked at negative policy rates during the global financial crisis, we monitored their use in other   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final jurisdictions, we continue to do so, but we do not see negative policy rates as likely to be an appropriate policy response here in the united states. michelle smith. okay, we’re going to the wall street journal. nick timiraos. thanks, chair powell. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. i guess i wanted to understand, specifically, how the actions you’ve announced this evening will get credit to households and firms that are going to see large drops in income and revenue. and also, to the extent that they are needed, what steps would you recommend the fiscal authorities undertake—again, to make sure that firms with large drops in income and revenue don’t go bust over the next few weeks or months? chair powell. so let me tell you how, i think—what our tools can accomplish, and—and really what they’re not designed to accomplish. so what our liquidity operations—and i’ll talk specifically about the treasury and mbs purchases—are designed to do is to assure the proper functioning of the treasury and mbs markets. the treasury market is one of the most important, perhaps the most important, market in the world. it’s probably the most liquid large market in the world. the mbs market is very important: it’s closely linked to the treasury market, and it’s the way that our monetary policy decisions flow through to borrowers in the real economy. so, two very important markets. and they had reached levels of very high illiquidity, and—to the point where we—as you know, last week we offered financing—very large amounts of financing. and after that, we bought assets across the curve to try to support liquidity and return to normal function. and we found that that helped, but, nonetheless, we thought we had to do more. and we knew what we had to do, which was the asset purchase programs that we did today. and those are designed to restore those key markets to normal function.   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final now, why is that important to—to everyone? these markets are part of the foundation of the global financial system and of the united states financial system. and if they are not functioning well, then other markets—then that will spread to other markets. and those are the markets that—that amount to—that—where households and businesses typically get credit. so we know that dysfunctional financial markets—a dysfunctional financial system, really, can have very big negative effects on the economy. we saw that during the financial crisis. this is a very different situation, but, nonetheless, we thought it was quite important for us to take strong measures to support—to support proper market function in these important markets. now, you asked about households. it’s true, we don’t have the tools to reach individuals and particularly small businesses and other businesses and people who may be out of work or whose businesses may not—may experience a period of very low activity. we don’t have those tools. we have the tools that we have, and we use them. i think we’ve used them quite aggressively for the benefit of the public. but this is a multifaceted problem, and it requires answers from different parts of the government and society. i mean, i think that, by far, the most important is the response of the health-care workers and health-care policymakers. after that, fiscal policy. we’ve had one round of fiscal policy, another coming. i think fiscal policy is a way to direct relief, really, to particular populations and groups. monetary policy has a role, and it really is in, you know—our original role was providing liquidity to financial systems when they’re under stress, and that’s—that’s really part of what we did today. the other role is to support demand through lower interest rates, and we did that. you—you asked about fiscal as well, and i guess i’ve sort of covered that. we do think fiscal response is—is critical, and we’re happy to see that those measures are being considered, and we—we hope they are effective.   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final michelle smith. okay, we’re going to go to fox business. edward lawrence. thank you, mr. chairman. edward lawrence from fox business network. in your statement, you say that the market measures of inflation have declined. the fed has undershot inflation in the last year, and that’s become one of the focuses of the fomc meetings. now, does the federal reserve see deflation coming, and is this large cut meant to get in front of any more inflation? plus, as a second question, would the fed consider buying securities outside of treasuries and mortgage-backed securities? thank you. chair powell. right. so, on—on inflation, you know, the—the economy’s performed so well, really, over the last few years, and right up through january: historically low unemployment—50-year-low unemployment for a couple of years, 11 years—almost 11 years of expansion so far, and yet inflation lingered below 2 percent. so we’ve been concerned that inflation not move down further. it’s not at all a question of deflation. it was a question of not getting inflation up to our target on a robust, symmetric kind of a way. so, with this coronavirus arriving, we judged that the—the net effects of this will be to— to have inflation move down even a little bit more. and it’s—it’s not a question—it’s not—it’s not an issue of deflation. again, it’s just an issue of inflation probably falling even a bit further. we expect, with uncertainty, that, you know—that it will fall a little bit further, at least, below where it has been. we are—of course, we don’t have the legal authority to buy other securities other than the ones we already buy, and we’re not seeking authority to do so. we haven’t discussed that at the—at the fomc, and it’s not—it’s not legal authority that we’re seeking. michelle smith. okay, we’ll go to the financial times. brendan greeley. thank you, chair powell. this is brendan greeley with the financial times. you have talked about the mortgage-backed security purchases and the   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final treasury purchases as a stability—a stability operation. i’m pretty sure that every person on this call has an editor asking to determine whether or not this is quantitative easing. how do we draw a distinction between these asset purchases and something you may do in the future that is explicit quantitative easing? or can we think of this as the first step in quantitative easing? chair powell. so what—what i can tell you definitively is what the purpose of the asset purchases was, and i mentioned this in my statement. and it really is to support the availability of credit in the economy—households and businesses—and thereby support the overall economy. how do they do that? they do that by supporting proper market functioning in the treasury market and the mbs market. so you see—and i think you’ll see—as these purchases roll forward, you will see the treasury market and the mbs market returning to normal market function, and that will actually support economic activity. that will be a positive for economic activity. in terms of what it’s labeled, that’s of less interest to me. i really think we are very clear in our minds what we’re doing this for and what the logical effects would be, which would be— which would be both better market function and—and—you know, when there’s better market function, it will be—you know, policy will be supporting the economy better. michelle smith. okay, bloomberg tv. michael mckee. thank you, mr. chairman. i want to ask some timing questions here. first, on the—whatever it is, qe or not qe, you talk in the press release about increase “over coming months.” is there a timetable for that? how long are we talking about—$700 billion, obviously, over two months is a lot different from $700 billion over the course of a year. and do you have a date where you would reevaluate and perhaps add more or end the program? and the same with the interest rate cut to zero—how long do you think that might last, and   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final would you be inclined to quickly go back to a higher level, the 100 basis points or more that you cut it from? or would you anticipate that this will be a long, slow process going back? chair powell. okay, so—sorry. michelle smith. mike, can you ask your question? chair powell. what was it again? what was the question again? just tell me. i can’t read my writing. [laughter] michael mckee. i was asking about timing. how long a period— chair powell. ah, okay, great. michael mckee. —are we talking about for the qe purchases, and how long do you anticipate keeping rates low, and how fast would you bring them back up again? chair powell. okay, sorry. so that’s the “in coming months” language. let me tell you what we were doing there. so there’s no monthly cap here. there's no weekly cap. the desk is going to go out, and it’s going to buy at a strong rate that is—that we think will restore market function—restore liquidity as quickly as it can be restored. and that language is open ended, and it’s meant to send a signal to the market that—that, you know, we’re not going to be bound by, for example, $60 billion a month or anything like that. we’re going to go in strong starting tomorrow, and we’re going to buy across the curve, and we’re going to buy mbs, and we’re really going to use our tools to do what we need to do here, which is restore these important markets to normal function. so that—that’s really what that is. as far as—as the policy rate, what we’ve said is that we will maintain the rate at this level until we’re confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. so, you can see, that’s the test we’ve written down. and if you—if you look at it, you’ll see that some things have to happen   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final before we’d consider—we’d have to become confident of—that the economy has weathered these recent events and also is on track to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. so that’s a test we’ll be looking at, and i think it suggests that, you know, we’re going to be watching and willing to be patient, certainly. michelle smith. okay, we’re going to go to the associated press. christopher rugaber. hi, it’s chris rugaber at ap. in 2008, you had a lot of coordination between the white house at that time, the fed, the treasury—bernanke doing a lot of things with paulson and so forth. you know, today the white house had its press conference at 5:00. you guys are doing something a little separate. is there—do you think it would be more helpful to markets—perhaps, in the broader economy, to have a more coordinated response? is that something we might look for in the future? chair powell. well, i would say this. you know, we have different tools. i think we do, actually, work pretty closely with the treasury department and—and cooperate with them on things, with clear lines of delineation. for example, the treasury department has authority over fiscal policy. that’s not our job. it’s their job, with other parts of the administration. it’s just that—like that for us with monetary policy. we have sole responsibility for monetary policy and strong instructions from congress to conduct it in an independent, nonpolitical way. so those two things are—one for each of us. but in the middle there, there are areas where we—where we can cooperate. and also, there’s a long history. you would want the finance ministry and the treasury [and the central bank] to be talking in every major economy in the world. you would want them to be regularly exchanging information—professional relationships not just at the, you know, the chair-to- treasury-secretary level, but also through the organization. for example, the new york fed is   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final the treasury’s agent—fiscal agent, as you know, so there’s a lot that goes into debt management and the issuance of debt, which happens at the new york fed. so i think we do, actually—we have professional, good working relationships up and down the chain there, and, you know, that—that seems to me to be working. and there is—there’s also quite a lot of coordination in other respects with—of course, with foreign central banks, but you didn’t ask about that. michelle smith. okay, we’re going to go to the washington post. [silence] washington post, are you there? heather long. hey, sorry, i’m here. i think—hi, chair powell. two questions this evening. first, have you personally been tested for coronavirus, and are you working from home? if you could shed some light on the precautions you’re taking. and, second, do you believe the fed has sufficient tools at the moment, or are you seeking congressional action to expand your tool set? chair powell. so i feel fine. i feel very well, and so there’s no reason for me to be tested. we are observing—we’re trying to model good behavior here, so we’re observing quite a lot of teleworking. and also, we’re—you know, we’re not having a lot of big, crowded meetings—we’re not having any big, crowded meetings. so we’re trying to observe all of the things that the professionals tell us to do. i do expect to do some teleworking because i want to model that—that it’s okay for the people to do so. in fact, it’s important for them to do so. so i will do that. in terms of our—of our toolkit, let me say first that, you know, i think we do have plenty of space to adjust our policy. i mentioned our liquidity tools—you know, we have a lot of power in our liquidity tools, and, as i mentioned, we’re prepared to use them. in addition, we’ve got plenty of space left to offer forward guidance, asset purchases, and adjust those policies, so i   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final think we do have room. we—we have not at all made a decision to request further—further tools or authorities from congress, no. we—we have not made that decision. it is not something we’re actively considering right now. michelle smith. okay, we’ll go to the new york times. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. this is jeanna smialek from the new york times. thanks for taking our questions. i’m just curious—you know, obviously, you held this meeting in lieu of your meeting later this week. will you still release a summary of economic projections? and if not, how should we understand how you guys are thinking about the economy as the coronavirus shapes up? chair powell. so why no—i guess you’re asking, why no sep, and what’s our forecast? so a couple reasons we didn’t do an sep. first, we decided on thursday to move the meeting up by three days to today, and that’s before the seps are generally filed. they hadn’t been filled out, and we—frankly, we spent our time focused on getting ready to make these announcements. second, and, you know, a number of fomc participants had already reached out to make the point that the economic outlook is evolving on a daily basis, and it really is depending heavily on the spread of the virus and the measures taken to affect it and how long that goes on. and that is just not something that’s knowable. so, actually, writing down a forecast in that circumstance didn’t seem to be useful, and, in fact, it could have been more of an obstacle to clear communication than a help. i do expect that we’ll return to the quarterly— regular quarterly cycle in june, however. in terms of the forecast, so, as i mentioned, you know, we see the u.s. economy starting out strong—from a strong position, different—different as we—as we talked through it today. people have a range of perspectives on the way the year is going to go, but i think there’s a   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final pretty broad sense that the second quarter will be a weak quarter, with probably out—you know, output declining a bit. after that, it becomes hard to say, you know, what’ll happen in the third and fourth quarters and thereafter, and it’s going to depend, again, on—on the path of the virus. so the thing we do know is that we’ll be here doing our job and supporting the flow of credit and there to do what we can when the recovery comes to make it as vigorous as possible. michelle smith. okay. now we’ll go to bloomberg news. craig torres. hi, chair powell. craig torres at bloomberg news. you say the path of the economy more or less depends on the path of the virus. how important is fiscal policy now in determining whether this sudden stop in activity is long or short and of high human consequence or little human consequence? and, second, can you talk a little bit about what’s on your dashboard for economic and financial indicators that you’re going to be watching day to day? i know vice chair clarida said that we should start seeing the data show up in april. what are you going to be watching, and what should we be watching? chair powell. so, in terms of fiscal policy, i think in the first instance—and you’re—you’re seeing some of this now—is the thing that fiscal policy and, really, only fiscal policy can do is reach out directly to affected industries, affected workers, and we’ve seen some of that. so, that’s—that’s an important job for fiscal policy. more broadly, after that, there’s the question of—of fiscal—broader fiscal stimulus, and i think that’ll depend on the path of the economy. i—i think there is such a wide range of possibilities here that it’s some—it’s very hard to predict. but there could certainly be—there could certainly be, you know, a need for that. and your second question was—what was your second question? craig torres. yes. it was on what indicators you’re going to be looking at, financial and real.   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final chair powell. well, i think, in the very near term, we’re going to be looking at, you know, the treasury market function. we’re really going to be looking to see that financial markets are returning to more liquid, more normal functioning. that is an essential part of our job. that is—actually, you know, that is the thing that central banks were originally designed to do, was to provide liquidity to financial systems in stress, so we take that job very seriously. it’s probably the most important thing we’re doing now is that. so we’ll be watching that and we’ll be prepared to use our tools when and as appropriate to address—to—to support market functioning and really to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. those are the things i’ll be looking at. you know, in terms of economic data, i think it’s just so early. you know, we’re really looking—i mean, the economic data will follow the data on the spread of the virus. you know, i think what happens—what happens during the spread of the virus is probably not going to tell you a lot about where the economy will be in six months. it’s going to be— because you may have a—you probably have a bad quarter in the second quarter, but if things get better in the third quarter, that probably won’t matter so much. we may be able to come back from that. if it lasts longer—so that’s really what i’ll be looking for, is—is what is going to be the spread of the virus and what’s the path it’s going to take and what are the effects on the economy. michelle smith. okay, we’ll go to nbc news now. david gura. hi, chair powell. this is david gura from nbc news. and a lot of good questions here, so i’ll—i’ll turn to one that’s more philosophical in nature. and you’ve talked a bit about the—the disruptions from the coronavirus outbreak and having lower economic activity for a period of time. i’m reckoning with fact that my kid’s going to be out of school until april 20 at the earliest, so we’re feeling this very, very acutely. but i wonder if you   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final could just give us your perspective on the time horizon here and put that into some broader context—how you look at this and how anomalous this thing is with which you and your colleagues are going to have to reckon. that’s my first question. the second is, you know, we’ve seen a variety of tools here deployed over these last few weeks, and the market—which i know is something that you pay at least minimal attention to— has reacted negatively to some of that. what do you make of that? going back to the question that was asked earlier about the toolbox and—and what’s left—what’s left in it, rates are low. does that provoke any apprehension, any nervousness on your part that there are fewer tools therein? chair powell. so i guess your first question is, how—how do we think about the time—the time for this thing? you know—and the truth is, we just don’t know, and, you know, the experts we talk to will say that they don’t know, and that it’s, in fact, unknowable. it’s going to depend on a number of things. first, it’s the measures that we take to, you know, to—with the social distancing, and the—all the things businesses and school and everyone’s doing now. and that will depend, to some extent, on how compliant people are. you can see that some countries have had a—have been able to, through aggressive measures and really high compliance—have been able to bend the curve and—and do that. and whether we succeed or—you know, that’s really the question. and i wouldn’t—i wouldn’t, you know—i’ll resist the impulse to guess. i really don’t know what that will be. in terms of the toolbox, as i mentioned, we think we have plenty of policy space left, plenty of power left in our tools, and i would point in particular to the liquidity tools. that, i think, is—is right now the most important thing that we’re doing. our interest rates will matter—cuts will matter now to borrowers who will get some relief from our cuts, but they’ll   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final matter a lot more when the economy begins to recover. so—but in the forefront now are the liquidity tools and—and getting that job done well. in addition, as i mentioned, we—you know, we have room to provide forward guidance, to do more asset purchases. i think there—there is room for us to do what we need to do. i—i would just close, though, by saying that, you know, typically, fiscal policy does play a major role when—when there are downturns. you saw—you’ve seen that in many past downturns, and that’s beyond just the automatic stabilizers. sometimes fiscal policy comes in on a discretionary basis, and that—that will probably need to be the case here as well. michelle smith. okay, we’ll go to politico. victoria guida. hi, victoria guida with politico. thanks for doing the call. i just wanted to ask, do you see a bigger role here for the financial stability oversight council? with all the stress that’s showing up in different markets, do you see risks to financial stability rising? do you think there are some activities that fsoc might want to crack down on? and are you confident that there aren’t any nonbanks that are systemically important? chair powell. fsoc is really something that the treasury secretary chairs. and it’s a big group—it’s got a lot of people. i think it serves a good purpose. but, you know, you should know that we are, of course, in regular contact with the other regulatory agencies, constantly talking about what’s going on in markets. there’s a lot of information and conversation on an ongoing basis there, i would say. so—and the same is true with our central bank contacts around the world. we’re in ongoing contact with all the major central banks around the world, talking about what’s going on. we’re having group calls, we’re calling one- on-one, so there’s quite a lot of information being exchanged there.   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final and then, your question was, nonbank sifis. you know, again, that’s a judgment for the—that’s a judgment for the fsoc. i—you know, i’m comfortable with the actions that we’ve taken, and if—if we do identify, you know, a systemically important nonbank institution, then we wouldn’t hesitate to designate it, but—although i guess now we’re working more on activities, but we do still have the power to designate institutions, so— michelle smith. okay— victoria guida. financial stability risks—are those rising? chair powell. i’m sorry, the question was— victoria guida. are risks to financial stability rising, given all the stress that’s happening in financial markets? chair powell. well, yes. i would say, you know, that’s—that’s something that happens when markets are as volatile as they are, when you’re having these big market movements while markets are trying to understand what’s going on. they’re trying to reach a view on—in high uncertainty, and that’s why you see lots and lots of volatility. i think there’s more risk to financial stability in an era like—like that than there is when things are really placid, and, you know, we’re going home at 4 o’clock and kind of bored over here. that’s not the case right now. so, financial stability—i would say those—those risks do rise at a time of high volatility, particularly a time where we’re presenting—presented with a challenge that is—is kind of unique, really—it’s not something we’ve all done before. i also want to add, though, that, you know, we’re strongly focused on financial stability. we monitor it carefully. we’ve built a very resilient financial system. the banks are highly capitalized, lots of liquidity, much better at understanding and managing their risks, their resilience to stress. so our financial stability focus—our focus on an event like this over the last   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final 10 years will pay dividends, in the sense that you have a much more resilient financial system than you’ve had before. michelle smith. okay, we’ll go to market news. jean yung. hi, this is jean yung. i wanted to ask, a few days ago the open market desk expanded its term repo operations, but the take-up was a bit low. is that—did you have any takeaway from that? did that indicate to you that the repos were not working as you had envisioned it, or was there something else that you learned from that? thank you. chair powell. thank you. yes, so we saw, and everyone saw, that liquidity had become very strained in treasury and mbs markets, and we decided to offer very large quantities of term and overnight repo to address that. that makes it easier to finance the purchase of repos—sorry, of treasuries and mbs. so we did that, and as you pointed out, the take-up was not as high as many had expected, and i did—we did learn something from that. we thought that was worth doing, and what we learned was that we needed to go direct here rather than trying to intermediate through the dealers. and so we realized at that point that we would need to actually purchase securities for our portfolio, so we did that on friday. we bought—the next day, friday, we went in and we bought across the curve, and we bought, i think, $37 billion worth of securities, and then we saw what happened with that. we saw that market function improved a little bit, but still it wasn’t what we needed. and that’s why we brought together the full fomc and had our meeting this afternoon and announced these measures this evening, which are strong measures, with the broad support of the committee to provide really substantial amounts of liquidity. and i—i think you can see us working through different solutions and—and finding the one that we think really will work and then acting quite vigorously, quite aggressively tonight to implement it.   march 15, 2020 chair powell’s press conference call final michelle smith. okay, we’re going to go to reuters for the last question. howard schneider. thanks, chair powell. howard schneider with reuters. two things, if i could. could you describe any discussions you’ve had in coordination with the major banks—this whole talk of drawing down liquidity, drawing down capital buffers—how far can they draw it down? how much do you think they can put out—out to customer finance? did you get explicit agreements for them that this will go to customer finance and not something else? and then, secondly, is there any discussion yet of—of using the 13(3) powers of the fed to do some sort of direct lending facility? chair powell. we have given broad general guidance to the banks. we’d like them to use their buffers to provide—you know, to provide loans and—and also to work with their borrowers. as you can see, we’re providing a lot of guidance to them across a wide range, and they’re saying they have every intention of doing that. that’s good to hear. and—so we’ll see how that works out. there—there are a lot of discussions going on, and, you know, we hear the banks saying, that’s exactly what they’re going to do, so that’s a good thing. you know, we’re—of course, we’ve—we’re—we have nothing to announce on—on 13(3) powers, but, you know, of course, we—that’s part of our playbook in—you know, in any situation like this. so, as i said, we’re—we’re prepared to use our authorities as is appropriate to—you know, to support borrowing and lending in the economy, and, hence, to support the availability of credit to households and businesses. michelle smith. okay, thank you very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations the system open market account (soma) manager first reviewed developments in domestic and global financial markets. financial markets remained exceptionally volatile amid the global spread of the coronavirus and uncertainty regarding its effects. since the meeting of the fomc in late january, the s&p 500 index declined 18 percent, nominal u.s. treasury yields moved 60 to 100 basis points lower, and market-based measures of inflation compensation fell 75 to 100 basis points. investment-grade and high-yield credit spreads widened about 120 basis points and 360 basis points, respectively. the u.s. dollar appreciated notably against most currencies, with the exception of other safe-haven currencies, and crude oil prices dropped 40 percent. against this backdrop, expectations for the path of the federal funds rate adjusted sharply. implied rates on federal funds futures contracts suggested the committee was expected to reduce the target range 1 full percentage point at its upcoming scheduled meeting following the 50 basis point reduction in the target range in early march. in addition, market participants reportedly anticipated that the committee would announce additional purchases of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs). trading conditions across a range of markets were severely strained. in corporate bond markets, trading activity and liquidity were at very low levels, although not back to the low point reached in 2008. market participants expected that actions taken to slow the spread of the virus could have significant effects on the credit worthiness of certain borrowers, particularly those at the lower end of the credit spectrum. market participants also increasingly pointed to concerns in other segments of the debt market. in securitized markets, including those for asset-backed securities (abs) and commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs), primary market issuance slowed, and secondary market trading had become less orderly, with money managers selling shortdated liquid products to meet investor redemptions. in the treasury market, following several consecutive days of deteriorating conditions, market participants reported an acute decline in market liquidity. a number of primary dealers found it especially difficult to make markets in off-the-run treasury securities and reported that this segment of the market had ceased to function effectively. this disruption in intermediation was attributed, in part, to sales of off-the-run treasury securities and flight-to-quality flows into the most liquid, on-the-run treasury securities. conditions in short-term funding markets also deteriorated sharply amid a decline in market liquidity and challenges in dealer intermediation. over recent days, the premium paid to obtain dollars through the foreign exchange swap market increased sharply, and the volumes in term repurchase agreement (repo) markets dropped significantly. issuance of commercial paper (cp) maturing beyond one week reportedly almost dried up at the end of the week before the meeting, and primary- and secondary-market liquidity for financial and nonfinancial cp was described as nearly nonexistent at a time when investor concern about issuer credit risk was rising. the manager then summarized actions taken by the desk to address some of the strains in financial markets. repo lending operations were greatly expanded to address the acute worsening in term funding markets; these operations included the addition of large-scale one- and three-month term repo operations. despite the sizable offering of additional term repo, take-up was well below the offered amounts, and there was little improvement in treasury market functioning. as a result, the chair, in consultation with the fomc, instructed the desk to conduct purchases of treasury securities across a range of maturities. the desk also revised the schedule of treasury purchases, announcing that $37 billion of the monthly scheduled purchases would be completed on friday, march 13. these purchases were conducted across the curve. market participants suggested that the minutes of the meeting of march 15, 2020 page 3  operations had been helpful in addressing some funding pressures, but trading conditions in treasury, mortgage, and credit markets remained severely strained. the soma manager noted that, if the fomc directed the desk to conduct additional purchases of mbs and treasury securities, the desk could initially conduct such purchases at a more rapid pace to more quickly address liquidity strains. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. no intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the coronavirus outbreak was disrupting economic activity in many countries, including the united states, by the time of the march 15 meeting. there were limited available u.s. economic data, however, that covered the period since the intensification of concerns about the domestic effects of the outbreak. information that predated that period indicated that labor market conditions had remained strong through february and that real gross domestic product (gdp) appeared to have been increasing at a moderate pace in the first two months of the year. consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce), remained below 2 percent in january. survey-based measures of longerrun inflation expectations were little changed. total nonfarm payroll employment expanded strongly in january and february, and the unemployment rate was at its 50-year low of 3.5 percent in february. meanwhile, the labor force participation rate and the employmentto-population ratio edged up on net. initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits—a timely indicator of a deterioration in labor market conditions—remained near historically low levels through early march, which was still before economic shutdowns started to take place in the united states. nominal wage growth was moderate on balance. average hourly earnings for all employees increased 3 percent over the 12 months ending in february. the employment cost index for privatesector workers increased 2.7 percent over the 12 months ending in december, while total labor compensation per hour in the business sector—a highly volatile measure of wage gains—rose 3.6 percent over the four quarters of last year. total consumer prices, as measured by the pce price index, increased 1.7 percent over the 12 months ending in january. core pce price inflation (which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) was 1.6 percent over that same 12-month period. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 2.1 percent in january. the consumer price index (cpi) rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in february, and the core cpi increased 2.4 percent over that same period. recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed, on balance, in recent months. the survey of professional forecasters measure for the next 10 years was unchanged in the first quarter, as was the longer-run measure from the blue chip survey in march. the university of michigan surveys of consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years edged down in february and remained in the lower part of its prevailing range in early march. the three-year-ahead measure from the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations edged up in february and remained in its recent range. real pce growth was moderate in january. the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate pce edged down in february, and the pace of sales of light motor vehicles in january and february was above its fourth-quarter average. however, the consumer sentiment measure from the michigan survey started to decline notably in early march, and other daily and weekly sentiment measures—such as the bloomberg consumer comfort index, the morning consult confidence index, and the rasmussen consumer index—were also deteriorating. both starts and building permit issuance for singlefamily homes increased in january over their fourthquarter averages, and starts of multifamily units also moved up. new and existing home sales in january were both above their average fourth-quarter levels. nominal shipments and new orders of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased solidly in january, although the anticipated resumption of deliveries of the boeing 737 max was delayed until later in the year. nominal business expenditures for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector increased in january. the total number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector—was edging up through mid-march and was not yet showing any of the expected falloff from the recent sharp declines in crude oil prices. the available data suggested that manufacturing production moved up in february after edging down in january, leaving the level of factory output little changed, on net, page 4 federal open market committee  over the past 12 months. although output in the mining sector—which includes crude oil extraction—had increased in january, available data indicated that output in this sector would decrease in february; the recent sharp declines in crude oil prices pointed to a reduction in mining-sector production over at least the near term. total real government purchases appeared to be increasing moderately. federal defense spending rose in january and february, and federal employment was boosted by hiring for the 2020 census. state and local government payrolls expanded strongly in january and february, and nominal construction spending by these governments increased solidly in january. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit narrowed in january, as a steep fall in imports more than offset a decline in exports. the fall in imports, which followed a sizable fourth-quarter decline, was led by lower imports of industrial supplies, automotive products, and capital goods. the decline in exports was driven by lower exports of capital goods and industrial supplies. available indicators suggested that both exports and imports likely declined in february, in part reflecting disruptions related to the coronavirus outbreak. the pace of economic growth abroad was already subdued before the outbreak. in the advanced foreign economies (afes), real gdp growth had slowed sharply at the end of 2019, and indicators pointed to only a modest pickup in economic growth early this year. in the emerging market economies (emes), incoming data had been more positive, as indicators for high-tech and manufacturing production in asian economies outside of china were upbeat, and the effects of social protests in chile and hong kong, along with the effects of the general motors strike on mexican economic activity, had faded. by early february, however, the coronavirus outbreak in china brought economic activity in many parts of the country to a standstill. hubei province, the epicenter of the outbreak and a manufacturing hub, was put under quarantine, and factories across the country were shut down. foreign economic indicators for the more recent period, following the spread of the virus to the rest of the world, were generally not yet available. however, widespread shutdowns together with lower commodity prices and tighter financial conditions suggested that activity was weakening sharply in most foreign economies. staff review of the financial situation concerns about the coronavirus outbreak dominated financial market developments at home and abroad over the intermeeting period. equity prices, sovereign yields, and the market-implied expected trajectory of the federal funds rate all plummeted, and the volatility of asset prices soared. late in the intermeeting period, shortterm funding markets showed signs of stress, with elevated demand for repo funding and increased short-term spreads. trading conditions for treasury securities and mbs were impaired. moreover, primary issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds was sporadic, and that of speculative-grade corporate bonds and leveraged loans virtually stopped after late february. data from before the escalation of coronavirus concerns in late february suggested that financial conditions for nonfinancial businesses and for households had generally remained supportive of economic activity and spending, but developments late in the intermeeting period pointed to tightening credit conditions. expectations for the path of the federal funds rate declined sharply over the intermeeting period. toward the end of the period, a straight read of overnight index swap (ois) quotes suggested that the federal funds rate would remain below 25 basis points at least until the middle of 2021. after the 50 basis point decrease in the target range on march 3, prices of federal funds futures options suggested that investors assigned a significant probability to the target range decreasing to 0 to 25 basis points at or before the scheduled march meeting. yields on nominal treasury securities plummeted across the maturity spectrum, with the 10- and 30-year yields reaching all-time lows at some point. a staff term structure model largely attributed the decline in the 10-year yield to lower expected future short-term rates. measures of inflation compensation based on treasury inflation-protected securities fell sharply and reached a historical low at the 5-to-10-year horizon late in the intermeeting period. uncertainty regarding future interest rates increased sharply over the intermeeting period. at one point, the one-month-ahead swaption-implied volatility of the 10-year swap rate surpassed its highest level seen during the “taper tantrum” episode in mid-2013. treasury market functioning was severely impaired late in the intermeeting period, with some dealers reportedly unwilling to make markets for clients and the normal linkage between cash and futures markets broken. market depth was extremely thin, and bid-ask spreads widened sharply. broad stock price indexes plummeted because of a flight to safety amid escalating concerns about global economic activity. although the declines were broad based, the airline, energy, and bank sectors were among the worst performers. stock price indexes were extremely minutes of the meeting of march 15, 2020 page 5  volatile, and the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500 index soared, sometimes reaching levels not seen since the fall of 2008. corporate bond spreads over comparable-maturity treasury yields widened significantly, and spreads on speculative-grade energy bonds widened especially sharply amid plunging oil prices. the 50 basis point decrease in the target range for the federal funds rate announced on march 3 passed through fully to overnight unsecured and secured rates. conditions in domestic short-term funding markets showed signs of funding strains late in the intermeeting period. the rates on unsecured cp and negotiable certificates of deposit with maturities exceeding one month increased sharply relative to ois rates, with pronounced effects for issuers in the energy and transportation sectors. overnight and term repo rates were elevated late in the intermeeting period, and the take-up of the federal reserve’s repo operations increased substantially for both overnight and term operations. over the intermeeting period, foreign risk asset prices plummeted amid a rapid deterioration of investor sentiment due to the global spread of the coronavirus. major foreign equity indexes dropped sharply over the intermeeting period, while option-implied volatility measures climbed to their highest levels since the global financial crisis. eme fund outflows accelerated late in the period as emerging market bond spreads widened notably. most afe long-term sovereign yields ended the period notably lower. inflation compensation in the euro area reached new lows. in response to the economic effect of the virus, several central banks cut policy rates and injected liquidity. the broad dollar index strengthened notably over the period, boosted by safe-haven demand, predominantly against eme currencies, and despite a significant decline in u.s. yields. safe-haven demand also bolstered the japanese yen and swiss franc. policy actions by chinese authorities supported the chinese renminbi, which depreciated about 1.5 percent against the dollar on net. other eme currencies, such as the brazilian real and mexican peso, depreciated sharply, as market participants viewed them as particularly vulnerable to a global economic slowdown and declining commodity prices. oil prices declined over 40 percent on expectations of lower demand due to the virus outbreak and an unexpected price cut by saudi arabia amid a breakdown of negotiations between opec and russia to reduce production levels. financing conditions for nonfinancial firms were strained over the late part of the intermeeting period. after robust issuance earlier in the first quarter, corporate bond issuance came to a near standstill around late february in the midst of elevated volatility following the escalation of concerns about the coronavirus outbreak. later in the intermeeting period, investment-grade bond issuance resumed intermittently, but speculative-grade issuance and leveraged loan issuance virtually stopped. in addition, some firms reportedly postponed plans to go public. commercial and industrial loan growth was modest. credit quality indicators for nonfinancial corporations had been solid earlier in the quarter but deteriorated following the escalation of the coronavirus outbreak, particularly for the speculative-grade and energy segments of the market. measures of the year-ahead expected default rate increased in march to levels slightly under those observed during the oil price plunge in early 2016, reflecting higher expected default rates among speculative-grade firms as well as energy firms. in addition, the outlook for corporate earnings deteriorated somewhat, as equity analysts revised down their earnings per share estimates a notch, and several firms warned that the coronavirus outbreak could hurt their earnings and make them difficult to predict. the supply of credit to small businesses over the fourth quarter of last year had remained relatively accommodative, but loan originations ticked down in january, consistent with ongoing reports of weak loan demand. market turmoil spilled into municipal bond markets late in the intermeeting period, as spreads widened substantially and some borrowers became hesitant to come to the market. credit conditions in the municipal market had been accommodative over the early part of the intermeeting period, and issuance volumes in late february were reportedly boosted by strong investor demand for low-risk assets. financing conditions in the commercial real estate (cre) sector worsened late in the intermeeting period, as issuance of cmbs slowed and spreads widened notably to around levels seen in 2016. data from before the escalation of concerns over the coronavirus outbreak pointed to accommodative financing conditions. cre loan growth at banks remained solid through february and cre debt outstanding increased modestly through mid-february, according to available data. the primary mortgage rate increased sharply toward the end of the period as mbs market liquidity deteriorated, after falling substantially in february and early march. capacity constraints at mortgage originators reportedly page 6 federal open market committee  intensified, while borrower interest in refinancing increased significantly from already elevated levels. moreover, additional constraints emerged as it became more difficult to conduct operations that usually happen faceto-face. financing conditions in consumer credit markets worsened late in the intermeeting period. strains began appearing in consumer abs markets, although less so than in other fixed-income markets. in march, consumer abs spreads widened sharply, liquidity deteriorated, and new issuance became sporadic. lenders in consumer credit markets began developing programs to assist borrowers whose finances were affected by the outbreak. earlier in the intermeeting period, financing conditions had been generally supportive of growth. credit card balances and auto loan balances both appeared to grow solidly through february, according to banks’ data, continuing their growth in the fourth quarter. conditions for subprime credit card borrowers remained relatively tight but showed some signs of easing. staff economic outlook the projection for the u.s. economy prepared by the staff for the march fomc meeting was downgraded significantly from the january meeting forecast in response to news on the spread of the coronavirus at home and abroad and in response to a related substantial markdown of the staff’s foreign economic outlook, along with recent financial market movements. real gdp was forecast to decline and the unemployment rate to rise, on net, in the first half of this year. given the downside risks and the elevated uncertainty about how much the economy would weaken and how long it would take to recover, the staff provided two plausible economic scenarios that spanned a range of possibilities. importantly, the future performance of the economy would depend on the evolution of the virus outbreak and the measures undertaken to contain it. in one scenario, economic activity started to rebound in the second half of this year. in a more adverse scenario, the economy entered recession this year, with a recovery much slower to take hold and not materially under way until next year. in both scenarios, inflation was projected to weaken, reflecting both the deterioration in resource utilization and sizable expected declines in consumer energy prices. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook participants noted that the coronavirus outbreak was harming communities and disrupting economic activity in many countries, including the united states, and that global financial conditions had also been significantly affected. participants expressed their deep concern for those whose health had been harmed and observed that the matter was, above all, a public health emergency. they commented that the measures—such as social distancing—taken in response to the pandemic, while needed to contain the outbreak, would nevertheless take a toll on u.s. economic activity in the near term. participants noted that available economic data showed that the u.s. economy came into this challenging period on a strong footing. information received since the committee met in january indicated that the labor market remained strong through february and that economic activity rose at a moderate rate. job gains had been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. although household spending had risen at a moderate pace, business fixed investment and exports had remained weak; furthermore, in recent weeks the energy sector had come under stress due to the sharp drop in oil prices. on a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy had been running below 2 percent. survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations had been little changed. however, market-based measures of inflation compensation had declined. all participants viewed the near-term u.s. economic outlook as having deteriorated sharply in recent weeks and as having become profoundly uncertain. many participants had repeatedly downgraded their outlook of late in response to the rapidly evolving situation. all saw u.s. economic activity as likely to decline in the coming quarter and viewed downside risks to the economic outlook as having increased significantly. participants noted that the timing of the resumption of growth in the u.s. economy depended on the containment measures put in place, as well as the success of those measures, and on the responses of other policies, including fiscal policy. with regard to households’ behavior, participants noted that, although consumption spending had been a key driver of growth in economic activity through the first two months of this year, the pandemic was starting to impair consumer confidence and to exert an adverse effect on household balance sheets. participants reported that wide-ranging social-distancing measures were in operation or in prospect in their districts. these measures—which included temporary closures of some physical locations, such as stores and restaurants, in which consumers purchased goods and services—would have the effect of reducing in-person transactions by households. online shopping could substitute for some minutes of the meeting of march 15, 2020 page 7  of this activity but was unlikely to replace it fully. the housing market was likely to be disrupted by social distancing, by financial uncertainty—including difficulties that households and businesses would face in meeting mortgage or rental payments—and by volatility in the market for mbs. participants stressed the major downside risk that the spread of the virus might intensify in those areas of the country currently less affected, thereby sidelining many more u.s. workers and further damping purchases by consumers. participants expressed concern that households with low incomes had less of a savings buffer with which to meet expenses during the interruption to economic activity. this situation made those households more vulnerable to a downturn in the economy and tended to magnify the reduction in aggregate demand associated with the nation’s response to the pandemic. participants relayed reports on business sectors already badly hit by the response to the coronavirus outbreak. these sectors included those affected by the cancellation of many events, decisions by firms and households to reduce travel, government-mandated reductions in entry from abroad, and cutbacks on economic activity that required in-person interaction. firms directly affected included those connected to air travel, cruise lines, hotels, tourism services, sports and recreation, entertainment, hospitality, and restaurants. in the past week, pullbacks in purchases at retail stores, except for emergency buying, had reportedly intensified significantly. in addition, the energy sector had come under stress because of recent large declines in oil prices. many u.s. businesses had moved to telework arrangements; other businesses, however, could not readily shift to telework status or had limited telework technology. participants observed that the coronavirus outbreak had inevitably hurt business confidence and that the expected length and severity of the restrictions on economic activity that involved inperson interaction would importantly affect the size of the response of investment spending to the situation. participants expressed concern about the financial strain that many u.s. firms were under because of the loss of business and the extraordinary turbulence in financial markets. with regard to supply chains, many contacts had reported that some linkages in china had been restored and that they were able to draw on inventory supplies and on alternative supply chains; however, in some areas of the country, the construction industry had reported continuing disruptions to supply chains from china. participants indicated that disruptions in the european economy and recent restrictions on travel from europe to the united states would adversely affect the u.s. economy’s supply chains; so too, if it eventuated, would a large increase in u.s. worker unavailability because of health reasons. several participants emphasized concern about the capacity of the health care system in the current situation and welcomed measures taken to prevent the system’s overall capacity from being exceeded. participants noted that foreign economic growth for the first half of this year would be badly hit by the severe disruptions to economic activity abroad associated with the response to the coronavirus outbreak, including the recent measures taken in major european countries. however, some encouraging signs had come from china in recent weeks in the form of indications of increasing production and of more purchases of u.s. goods. with regard to the labor market, participants noted that some firms would likely need to cut employment immediately. other firms, however, were looking for ways to retain employees during the period of reduced economic activity, in order to maintain capacity and be able to ramp up production once the public health crisis abated and demand rebounded. measures that reportedly helped partially substitute for layoffs included the encouragement by employers of voluntary leaves of absence, non-replacement of departing workers, and increased reliance on the delivery of goods to customers in place of on-site purchases. participants observed that businesses would be more likely to lay off workers on a major scale if the downturn in economic activity came to be perceived as likely to be protracted. participants commented that workers most severely affected in the current situation were those who were ill, those with low incomes, those connected to the most hard-hit sectors, and those with irregular or contingent employment. they also noted that many workers had jobs that did not permit working from home. with regard to inflation, participants noted that it had been running below the committee’s 2 percent longerrun objective before the coronavirus outbreak. they remarked that a stronger dollar, weaker demand, and lower oil prices were factors likely to put downward pressure on inflation in the period ahead and observed that this meant that the return of inflation to the committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective would likely be further delayed. participants indicated, however, that implementing a more accommodative stance of monetary policy at this meeting could be useful in helping offset these factors over time and in achieving the 2 percent inflation page 8 federal open market committee  objective over the longer run, by helping prevent circumstances of persistent resource slack or a lasting decline in inflation expectations. participants all agreed that the effects of the pandemic would weigh on economic activity in the near term and that the duration of this period of weakness was uncertain. they further concurred that the unpredictable effects of the coronavirus outbreak were a source of major downside risks to the economic outlook. participants raised several alternative scenarios with regard to the likely behavior of economic activity in the second half of this year. these scenarios differed from one another in the assumed length and severity of disruptions to economic activity. several participants emphasized that the temporary nature of the shock to economic activity, the fact that the shock arose in the nonfinancial sector, and the healthy state of the u.s. banking system all implied that the current situation was not directly comparable with the previous decade’s financial crisis and it need not be followed by negative effects on economic activity as long-lasting as those associated with that crisis. participants stressed that measures taken in the areas of health care policy and fiscal policy, together with actions by the private sector, would be important in shaping the timing and speed of the u.s. economy’s return to normal conditions. participants agreed that the federal reserve’s efforts to relieve stress in financial markets would help limit downside near-term outcomes by supporting credit flows to households and businesses, and that a more accommodative monetary policy stance would provide support to economic activity beyond the near term. among the downside risks to this year’s u.s. economic outlook, participants prominently cited the possibility of the virus outbreak becoming more widespread than expected. such an event could lead to more wide-ranging temporary shutdowns, with adverse implications for the production of goods and services and for aggregate demand. with regard to financial developments over the intermeeting period, participants noted that financial markets had exhibited extraordinary turbulence and stresses. participants commented on the conditions of high volatility and illiquidity characterizing the markets for u.s. treasury securities, especially off-the-run longer-term securities, and for agency mbs. participants expressed concern about the disruptions to the functioning of these markets, especially in view of their status as cornerstones for the operation of the u.s. and global financial systems and for the transmission of monetary policy. participants observed that federal reserve operations in recent days had provided some relief with regard to the liquidity problems, but they noted that severe illiquidity continued to prevail in key securities markets. many participants pointed to other dislocations in funding markets that could impede financial intermediation to households and businesses. they highlighted the acute problems that many firms were facing in issuing cp and corporate bonds. participants further noted that many businesses were tapping their backup credit lines with commercial banks. participants also discussed the implications of recent financial market turbulence for money market funds and government bond funds and for debt issuance by state and local governments. in their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, most participants judged that it would be appropriate to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 100 basis points, to 0 to ¼ percent. in discussing the reasons for such a decision, these participants pointed to a likely decline in economic activity in the near term related to the effects of the coronavirus outbreak and the extremely large degree of uncertainty regarding how long and severe such a decline in activity would be. in light of the sharply increased downside risks to the economic outlook posed by the global coronavirus outbreak, these participants noted that risk-management considerations pointed toward a forceful monetary policy response, with the majority favoring a 100 basis point cut that would bring the target range to its effective lower bound (elb). with regard to monetary policy beyond this meeting, these participants judged that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent until policymakers were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. a few participants preferred a 50 basis point cut at this meeting and noted that such a decision would provide support to economic activity in the face of the anticipated effects of the coronavirus. these participants preferred to wait until there was greater assurance that the transmission mechanism of monetary policy via financial markets and the supply of credit to households and businesses was working effectively. this would allow fiscal and public health policy responses to the coronavirus outbreak to take hold and preserve the ability of the committee to lower the target range, which was close to the elb, in the event of a further deterioration in the economic outlook. in addition, these participants noted that a lowering of the target range by 100 basis points, coming so soon after the reduction of 50 basis points less than two weeks earlier, ran the risk of sending an overly negative signal about the economic outlook. minutes of the meeting of march 15, 2020 page 9  participants also considered open market operations to purchase treasury securities and agency mbs to support the smooth functioning of these securities markets, which in turn would help support the supply of credit to households and businesses. participants generally agreed that, over the coming months, it would be appropriate to increase the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities by at least $500 billion and its holdings of agency mbs by at least $200 billion. additionally, all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs would be reinvested in agency mbs. those treasury and agency mbs purchases would be in addition to the recently expanded overnight and term repo operations conducted by the desk. participants stressed that it was important to communicate that the committee would be prepared to increase the size of the securities purchases, as needed, on the basis of its close monitoring of market conditions. some participants noted that it was important to stress in communications that the primary purpose of these asset purchases was to support the smooth functioning of treasury and agency mbs markets rather than to provide further monetary policy accommodation by pushing down longer-term yields. a couple of participants noted that because some of the purchases would be at longer maturities, the purchases could provide some accommodation by lowering longer-term yields. participants discussed some of the possible communications challenges associated with the committee’s policy decisions at this meeting. several participants noted that it would be important to communicate clearly and consistently about the rationale for the policy decisions taken at this meeting. some participants remarked that the committee’s policy actions regarding the target range and balance sheet could be interpreted as conveying negative news about the economic outlook. a few participants also remarked that lowering the target range to the elb could increase the likelihood that some market interest rates would turn negative, or foster investor expectations of negative policy rates. such expectations would run counter to participants’ previously expressed views that they would prefer to use other monetary policy tools to provide further accommodation at the elb. additionally, several participants remarked that the public might view the ability of the committee to provide further monetary policy accommodation as being limited. however, some participants noted that the committee would still be able to provide monetary policy accommodation even after lowering the target range for the federal funds rate to the elb. in particular, new forward guidance or balance sheet measures could be introduced. participants also indicated strong support for related actions taken by the board of governors to support the credit needs of households and businesses: • • • • to lower the primary credit rate by 150 basis points to ¼ percent and to allow depository institutions to borrow from the discount window for periods as long as 90 days in order to encourage more active use of the discount window on the part of depository institutions to meet unexpected funding needs to encourage depository institutions to utilize intraday credit to support the provision of liquidity to households and businesses and the smooth functioning of payment systems to encourage banks to use their capital and liquidity buffers as they provide loans to households and businesses affected by the coronavirus and undertake other supportive actions in a safe and sound manner to reduce reserve requirements to 0 percent in light of the shift to an ample-reserves regime and to support lending to households and businesses by depository institutions participants also indicated support for enhancing, in coordination with the bank of canada, the bank of england, the bank of japan, the european central bank, and the swiss national bank, the provision of liquidity via the standing u.s. dollar liquidity swap line arrangements. the pricing on the standing u.s. dollar swap arrangements would be lowered by 25 basis points so that the new rate would be the u.s. dollar ois rate plus 25 basis points, and u.s. dollars would be offered by foreign central banks with an 84-day maturity, in addition to the 1-week maturity operations. following this discussion, the chair indicated that these changes to the standing u.s. dollar liquidity swap line arrangements would be implemented consistent with the procedures described in the authorization for foreign currency operations. participants generally commented that these additional measures would be helpful in supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. a few participants commented that stigma associated with the discount window may still be present or that further action, such as a relaunch of the term auction facility, might be needed to encourage banks to take up additional funding. a few other participants noted that discount win- page 10 federal open market committee  dow stigma should be less of a concern than it was previously. in particular, these participants cited the lowering of the primary credit rate to the top of the target range for the federal funds rate, offering term funding for up to 90 days, and regulators encouraging banks to use the discount window to continue prudently lending to households and businesses. several participants commented that banks should be discouraged from repurchasing shares from, or paying dividends to, their equity holders in the wake of the proposed measures. participants generally noted that other measures to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, including those that relied on section 13(3) of the federal reserve act, might be needed in such an uncertain and rapidly evolving environment and that it would be prudent for the federal reserve to develop and remain prepared to implement such measures. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members noted that the coronavirus outbreak had harmed communities and disrupted economic activity in many countries, including the united states, and that global financial conditions had also been significantly affected. available economic data showed that the u.s. economy came into this challenging period on a strong footing, with a strong labor market, a low unemployment rate, and moderate growth in household spending, although business fixed investment and exports had remained weak. more recently, the energy sector had come under stress. on a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy were running below 2 percent. market-based measures of inflation compensation had declined, and surveybased measures of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed. members judged that the effects of the coronavirus would weigh on economic activity in the near term and would pose risks to the economic outlook. in light of these developments, almost all members agreed to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 0 to ¼ percent. these members expected that the target range would be maintained at this level until they were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. one member preferred to lower the target range by 50 basis points, to ½ to ¾ percent, at this meeting, in support of the actions taken to promote smooth market functioning and the flow of credit to households and businesses and in light of the anticipated effects of the coronavirus on eco- nomic activity and the economic outlook. in this participant’s view, a 50 basis point cut would preserve space for further cuts in the target range that could be implemented when market conditions had improved enough to ensure that the monetary policy transmission mechanism was functioning. members noted that they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information related to public health as well as global developments and muted inflation pressures, and that the committee would use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. members observed that, in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, the committee would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum-employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. they also agreed that those assessments would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. members emphasized that the federal reserve was prepared to use its full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and thereby promote its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. to support the smooth functioning of markets for treasury securities and agency mbs that are central to the flow of credit to households and businesses, over coming months the committee agreed to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $500 billion and its holdings of agency mbs by at least $200 billion. the committee also agreed to reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and mbs in agency mbs. in addition, members noted that the desk had recently expanded its overnight and term repo operations. members indicated that they would continue to closely monitor market conditions and that the committee was prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: “effective march 16, 2020, the federal open market committee directs the desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. the committee directs the minutes of the meeting of march 15, 2020 page 11  desk to increase over coming months the system open market account holdings of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) by at least $500 billion and by at least $200 billion, respectively. the committee instructs the desk to conduct these purchases at a pace appropriate to support the smooth functioning of markets for treasury securities and agency mbs. the committee also directs the desk to continue conducting term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample and to support the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. in addition, the committee directs the desk to conduct overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 0.00 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of treasury securities held outright in the system open market account that are available for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. the committee directs the desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and to reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities received during each calendar month in agency mortgage-backed securities. small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are acceptable. the committee also directs the desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 5:00 p.m.: “the coronavirus outbreak has harmed communities and disrupted economic activity in many countries, including the united states. global financial conditions have also been significantly affected. available economic data show that the u.s. economy came into this challenging period on a strong footing. information received since the federal open market committee met in january indicates that the labor market remained strong through february and economic activity rose at a moderate rate. job gains have been solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. although household spending rose at a moderate pace, business fixed investment and exports remained weak. more recently, the energy sector has come under stress. on a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than food and energy are running below 2 percent. market-based measures of inflation compensation have declined; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. consistent with its statutory mandate, the committee seeks to foster maximum employment and price stability. the effects of the coronavirus will weigh on economic activity in the near term and pose risks to the economic outlook. in light of these developments, the committee decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 0 to ¼ percent. the committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. this action will help support economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to the committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global developments and muted inflation pressures, and will use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, the committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. this assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. page 12 federal open market committee  the federal reserve is prepared to use its full range of tools to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and thereby promote its maximum employment and price stability goals. to support the smooth functioning of markets for treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities that are central to the flow of credit to households and businesses, over coming months the committee will increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $500 billion and its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $200 billion. the committee will also reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. in addition, the open market desk has recently expanded its overnight and term repurchase agreement operations. the committee will continue to closely monitor market conditions and is prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, patrick harker, robert s. kaplan, neel kashkari, and randal k. quarles. voting against this action: loretta j. mester president mester was fully supportive of all of the actions taken to promote the smooth functioning of markets and the flow of credit to households and businesses but voted against the fomc action because she preferred to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate to ½ to ¾ percent at this meeting. consistent with the committee’s decision to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 0 to ¼ percent, the board of governors voted unanimously to lower the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 0.10 percent and voted unanimously to approve a 1½ percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to 0.25 percent, effective march 16, 2020. the board also approved changes to allow reserve banks to extend primary credit loans for as long as 90 days and that could be prepaid or renewed on request. in addition, the board approved a reduction in reserve requirement ratios applicable to net transaction deposits above the exemption threshold to 0 percent effective with the reserve maintenance period beginning on march 26, 2020. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, april 28– 29, 2020. the meeting adjourned at 2:40 p.m. on march 15, 2020. notation vote by notation vote completed on february 18, 2020, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on january 28–29, 2020. videoconference meeting of march 2 a joint meeting of the federal open market committee and the board of governors was held by videoconference on march 2, 2020, at 7:30 p.m. to review developments related to the outbreak of the coronavirus and discuss steps that could be taken to provide support to the economy. as background for the committee’s discussion, the staff reviewed recent developments in financial markets and provided an assessment of the evolving risks to the economic outlook. the soma manager noted that since mid-february when concerns about the spread of the coronavirus beyond china had begun to intensify, global risk asset prices and sovereign yields had declined sharply. u.s. and global equity indexes were lower than at the time of the committee’s meeting in january and implied equity market volatility had risen to levels not seen since 2015. the deterioration in risk sentiment had also been reflected in a significant widening in u.s. and european corporate credit spreads and in peripheral european spreads. amid the ongoing market volatility, issuance of investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds and of leveraged loans had generally dried up. money markets had been resilient during the broader financial market volatility; pricing and trading conditions in offshore u.s. dollar funding markets had also been stable. market functioning had remained orderly despite deterioration in liquidity conditions in treasury, equity, and credit markets. financial market participants’ views on the likely course of u.s. monetary policy had changed since the committee’s january meeting. the expected path of the federal funds rate embedded in futures prices had shifted down significantly over the period. market commentary had interpreted chair powell’s february 28 statement as indicating the fomc was prepared to lower the target range for the federal funds rate at or before the march meeting to support the achievement of the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. expectations for global monetary and fiscal easing had in- minutes of the meeting of march 15, 2020 page 13  creased, with some market commentary noting the possibility of a coordinated effort across central banks or fiscal authorities. the soma manager noted that the situation remained highly fluid with key risks, including those associated with funding for corporate borrowers, operational vulnerabilities associated with the transition to alternative work arrangements, and the potential for impaired market functioning. the staff then provided an update on current conditions and changes to the economic outlook since the fomc’s january meeting. available indicators for china suggested that the spread of the coronavirus had been associated with a collapse in economic activity during the first quarter, with spillovers to the global economy from the drop in chinese demand and disruption of supply chains. although there were some tentative signs that the coronavirus in china was being contained and production was beginning to resume, the outbreak of the virus in other foreign economies was weighing on consumer and business sentiment and depressing consumption in those countries. all told, foreign economic activity was expected to be significantly weaker during the first half of 2020 than the staff had anticipated at the time of the january fomc meeting. the staff noted that the spread of the virus was at an earlier stage in the united states and its effects were not yet visible in monthly economic indicators, although there had been some softening in daily sentiment indexes and travel-related transactions. the outlook for real economic activity over the remainder of the year was highly uncertain and depended on the spread of the virus and the measures taken to contain it. scenarios involving a greater spread of the coronavirus and more severe social-distancing actions would be associated with a greater shutdown of production and disruption of supply chains, larger negative effects on consumer and business sentiment, more significant increases in unemployment, and worsening financial conditions. reductions in demand, coupled with a stronger u.s. dollar and weaker commodity prices, were expected to put downward pressure on inflation, with the magnitude of the softening in core inflation depending on the severity of the situation. fomc participants discussed the significant outbreaks of the coronavirus that had emerged recently in a few countries outside china and the likelihood that the virus would spread widely around the world, including in the united states. while the economic outlook at the time of the committee’s january meeting had been favorable, the potential spread of the virus and the measures needed to protect communities from it represented a material downside risk to the u.s. economy. a forceful monetary policy action could provide a clear signal to the public that policymakers recognized the potential economic significance of the situation and were willing to move decisively to support the achievement of the committee’s dual mandate goals and counter the recent tightening of financial conditions. although a reduction in the policy rate would not slow the spread of infection or remedy broken supply chains, it could help shore up the confidence of households, businesses, and financial markets; ease financial strains of consumers and firms; and provide meaningful support to the economy in the face of a large shock to demand. accordingly, participants supported a reduction of 50 basis points in the target range for the federal funds rate. on march 3, 2020, the committee completed the vote to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: “effective march 4, 2020, the federal open market committee directs the desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1 to 1¼ percent. in light of recent and expected increases in the federal reserve’s nonreserve liabilities, the committee directs the desk to continue purchasing treasury bills at least into the second quarter of 2020 to maintain over time ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early september 2019. the committee also directs the desk to continue conducting term and overnight repurchase agreement operations at least through april 2020 to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of sharp increases in non-reserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation. in addition, the committee directs the desk to conduct overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of 1.00 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of treasury securities held outright in the system open market account that are available for page 14 federal open market committee  such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. the committee directs the desk to continue rolling over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and to continue reinvesting all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities received during each calendar month. principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month will continue to be reinvested in treasury securities to roughly match the maturity composition of treasury securities outstanding; principal payments in excess of $20 billion per month will continue to be reinvested in agency mortgage-backed securities. small deviations from these amounts for operational reasons are acceptable. the committee also directs the desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 10:00 a.m. on march 3, 2020: “the fundamentals of the u.s. economy remain strong. however, the coronavirus poses evolv- ing risks to economic activity. in light of these risks and in support of achieving its maximum employment and price stability goals, the federal open market committee decided today to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by ½ percentage point, to 1 to 1¼ percent. the committee is closely monitoring developments and their implications for the economic outlook and will use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, patrick harker, robert s. kaplan, neel kashkari, loretta j. mester, and randal k. quarles. consistent with the committee’s decision to lower the target range for the federal funds rate to 1 to 1¼ percent, the board of governors completed on march 3, 2020, unanimous votes to lower the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 1.10 percent and to approve a ½ percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to 1.75 percent, effective march 4, 2020.  james a. clouse secretary 
april 29, 2020 chair powell. good afternoon. thanks for joining us today. i would like to begin by acknowledging the tragic loss and tremendous hardship that people are experiencing both here in the united states and around the world. the coronavirus outbreak is first and foremost a public health crisis, and the most important response is coming from those in the front lines in hospitals, emergency services, and care facilities. on behalf of the federal reserve, let me express our sincere gratitude to those dedicated individuals who put themselves at risk, day after day, in service to others and to our nation. the forceful measures that we as a country are taking to control the spread of the virus have brought much of the economy to an abrupt halt. many businesses have closed, people have been asked to stay home, and basic social interactions are greatly curtailed. people are putting their lives and livelihoods on hold, at significant economic and personal cost. all of us are affected, but the burdens are falling most heavily on those least able to carry them. it is worth remembering that the measures we are taking to contain the virus represent an investment in our individual and collective health. as a society, we should do everything we can to provide relief to those who are suffering for the public good. while many standard economic statistics have yet to catch up with the reality we’re experiencing, it’s clear that the effects on the economy are severe. millions of workers are losing their jobs: next week’s jobs report is expected to show that the unemployment rate, which was at 50-year lows just two months ago, has surged into double digits. household spending has plummeted as people stay home, and measures of consumer sentiment have fallen precipitously. hotels, airlines, restaurants, department stores, and other retailers have been particularly hard hit. manufacturing output fell sharply in march and is likely to drop even more  rapidly this month, as many factories have temporarily closed. overall, economic activity will likely drop at an unprecedented rate in the second quarter. inflation is also being held down, reflecting weaker demand as well as significantly lower energy prices. both the depth and the duration of the economic downturn are extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on how quickly the virus is brought under control. the severity of the downturn will also depend on the policy actions taken at all levels of government to cushion the blow and to support the recovery when the public health crisis passes. the federal reserve’s response is guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. we are also committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time. last month we quickly lowered our policy interest rate to near zero. we stated then and again today that we expect to maintain interest rates at this level until we’re confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. of course, lowering interest rates cannot stop the sharp drop in economic activity caused by closures and other forms of social distancing. and low rates will not effectively spur the economy if those rates do not feed through to broader financial conditions or if households and businesses are unable to get credit. the economic disruptions caused by the virus created tremendous strains in some essential financial markets and have impaired the flow of credit in the economy. without access to credit, families can be forced to cut back on necessities and could lose their homes. businesses can be forced to downsize or close, resulting in further losses of jobs and incomes and worsening the downturn. preserving the flow of credit is thus essential for mitigating the  damage to the economy and setting the stage for the recovery. we have been taking broad and forceful actions to these ends. to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, foster smooth market functioning, and promote effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions, we have been purchasing large amounts of treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities. the markets for these securities play a critical role in the economy, and they came under great stress last month as the scale of economic disruption became clearer and as investors clamored for liquidity. our purchases have helped market conditions improve substantially in recent weeks. in light of this improvement, we have slowed our pace of purchases. we will continue our purchases of treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities as needed. while the primary purpose of these securities purchases is to preserve smooth market functioning and effective policy transmission, the purchases will offer—will also foster more accommodative financial conditions. we are also undertaking programs to provide stability to the financial system and to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy—for households, for businesses of all sizes, and for state and local governments. these programs benefit the economy by providing financing where it is not otherwise available. in addition, by serving as a backstop to key credit markets, the programs can improve market functioning by increasing the willingness of private lenders to extend credit. many of these programs rely on emergency lending powers that are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. we are deploying these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by the financial backing and support from congress and the treasury. we will continue to use these powers  forcefully, proactively, and aggressively until we’re confident that we are solidly on the road to recovery. i would stress that these are lending powers and not spending powers. the fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. we can only make loans to solvent entities that the— with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. many borrowers will benefit from our programs, as will the overall economy. but for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. in these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. the cares act and other legislation provide direct help to people, businesses, and communities. this direct support can make a critical difference not just in helping families and businesses in a time of need, but also in limiting long-lasting damage to our economy. at the fed, we’re doing all we can to help american families and businesses weather this difficult period. when the spread of the virus is under control, businesses will reopen, and people will come back to work. we will continue to use our tools to assure that the recovery, when it comes, will be as robust as possible. thank you, and i’ll be glad to take your questions. michelle smith. jeanna smialek. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking our questions. you guys have cut rates to zero, you’re buying up huge quantities of government debt—i guess the question is, what more can you realistically do to help the economy, and where do you see a need for congress to step in? chair powell. so let me say that we’re—we’re committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time. we’re going to use them, as i mentioned,  forcefully, proactively, and aggressively until we’re confident that we’re solidly on the road to recovery and also to assure that that recovery, when it comes, will be as robust as possible. as long as needed, we’ll use them. and i would just say, we have a number of dimensions on which we can still provide support to the economy. as you know, our credit policies are not subject to a specific dollar limit. they can be expanded as appropriate, and we can do new ones. so we can continue to be part of the answer. will there be a need to do more, though? i think the answer to that—that will be “yes.” i would say, congress has also reacted quite aggressively and strongly with the cares act and other laws—several other laws. and that’s appropriate. with enhanced unemployment insurance and the paycheck protection program, we’ve seen an extraordinary, historically large reaction. but i would say that it may well be the case that the economy will need more support from all of us if the—if the recovery is to be a robust one. michelle smith. nick timiraos. nick timiraos. thanks, chair powell. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. i want to follow up on jeanna’s question and ask, what specifically do you think elected officials should consider in order to help return or hasten a stronger return to full employment? and what policy tools did you discuss at your meeting today that might be used to stop a deflationary spiral? chair powell. so let me—let me start—i’ll take the questions in the order you— you gave them. so in terms of, if i can say, legislative priorities, we don’t—we’re not responsible for fiscal policy. those will be decisions for congress to make. but i would say that policies that protect workers, businesses, and households from avoidable insolvency, that keep businesses going so that they’re able to produce goods and—and to either hold on to their  employees or quickly rehire them, those are going to be key policies. they’ll come with a hefty price tag, but we would come out of this event eventually with—with a stronger economy and with less long-run damage to the economy. so that’s—that’s a key thing that—that, really, congress could do over time. in terms of what we can do, i mentioned, we have our—our credit facilities are—are wide open. we can do more on that front. in addition, you know, we’ve had—we’ve had extensive discussions, as i’ve mentioned—done a lot of thinking about what monetary policy might look like over—in coming months over a range of potential scenarios for the economy. we do think that our—our policy stance today is right where it should be for now. as you know, we cut rates to the effective lower bound, we—and we’ve said that we’ll keep them there until we’re confident that the economy has weathered the effects of the outbreak and is on track to achieve our goals. with asset purchases, we’re continuing to purchase treasury securities and agency mbs in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning. so we’re doing those things, and i would say that we’ll continue to use our tools as needs be. michelle smith. steve liesman. steve liesman. mr. chairman, question—steve liesman with cnbc. i’ve got two questions here. first of all, why aren’t you announcing or conducting a specific quantitative easing program? and—and maybe you could explain what the context is now of the purchases that will be made and the amounts that are to come. the second question i have is, are—is the federal reserve really taking enough risk to help households and businesses here, in that you just said that the programs that are out there may be best for those who are able to repay loans. but—so don’t you have a series of programs  essentially lending only to those able to repay, which is essentially helping those who may need it the least? thank you. chair powell. so, let me say again, in terms of—of asset purchases and—and other measures, we—we do think our—our policy stance is appropriate now. we’ve had discussions, as i’ve mentioned, over time and done quite a bit of thinking about what we might do in the future. we think, for now, our policy stance is appropriate. we’re not going to change it now. and we’re really waiting to see more from the economy. there are a range of potential paths the economy could be on, and i think as—as the time approaches for—then we’ll—you know, we’ll address your first question, which is about asset purchases. so—but that’s not something we’re doing today. it’s—it’s something that we have talked about, and, you know, for now, we like our current policy stance. in terms of risk, so, you know, we operate under the laws that congress passes. and there are a number of aspects under section 13(3), and you can see that they’ve permitted us to, i think, move very quickly and move into areas where we’ve never been before and do so quite aggressively. so i—i think we’re going places and providing help in places where we never have, and i’m glad that we are. i think it’s appropriate that we are. nonetheless, these are lending powers. and if you read section 13(3) of the dodd- frank—or, the federal reserve act, and i know you have, it does require that—that we be secured to our satisfaction, and—and we can’t lend to insolvent companies. you know, it’s clear these are lending powers, and we are—we are ultimately bound to—to implement the laws that congress gives us. we—we do not make grants. we can’t make grants. and i—the reason i raised that in my remarks is that i just want to be clear on that.  we—you know, we can do what we can do, and we will do it to the absolute limit of those powers. we will—we’ll keep at it. and you—i just want people to know that we’ll—we will be at it with—with the legal authorities that we have until we get through this thing. we will keep using our authorities. but there are authorities that we don’t have, and there may be a need for those authorities to be used as well as ours. michelle smith. heather long. heather long. hi. hi, chair powell, it’s heather long from the washington post. i have two questions for you, both on timing. the first, do you plan to launch the corporate credit facility and the main street lending facilities in may or early may? anything you can give us—a sense on timing? and the second, in the statement, you referred today—the fomc refers today to a lot of medium-term risks from the pandemic. that sounds like you all think this is going to be a long recovery—a long road to recovery. can you give any more guidance on how you all see this recovery taking shape? thanks. chair powell. sure. so, in terms of those facilities, the corporate credit facilities are near being finalized and will be operating, i would say, soon—fairly soon. main street facility is—we’re close to announcing—to issuing a new term sheet. as you know, we put out a term sheet for comment a while back, and we got a couple thousand comments. we’ve carefully studied them. we’ve tried to reflect those in what we’re doing now. i think, with main street, there’ll be at least a couple of different kinds of lending going on there. it—this is a broad area of the economy with many different kinds of credit needs, so we’re going to keep at that for some time, i think, adding in sectors and lending products. so i think we’ll be at—we’ll  probably be continuing to work and expand main street for some time, but it won’t be done quite as quickly. but the first part of it, i think, will be done fairly quickly. in terms of our statement, so what we said was that we—i’ll just read the sentence. it says: “[the] ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term.” so the “medium”—but what we meant by that, “over the medium term”—so, obviously, what we’re talking about is, you know, not right now, in the very near term. it’s between now and the long term, so the next year or so. and i would point to a couple of—of risks to the outlook that—what we were thinking of. first is just the virus. how long will it take to get it under control? will there be additional outbreaks? will there be drugs that can either treat it or—or a vaccine of some kind? so there’s—all of that is very much shrouded in uncertainty. the second issue—and this is a very substantial one—is just the possibility of—of damage to the productive capacity of the economy through a couple of channels. the first is just workers who—if one is unemployed for an extended period, that person can—can lose the skills that are needed, can lose touch with the labor force, and have difficulty restarting his or her career. so that’s a—that’s a feature of deep and long recessions, and that’s something we’ve got to watch out for. another is just businesses—you know, these thousands of great medium- and small-sized businesses that we have all over the country. they’re worth so much more to the economy than the sum of their net assets. they contain—you know, they’re job creators, they’re really important. and if we see an unnecessary—unnecessary insolvencies, a wave of those, that could be damaging to the performance of the economy over time. so the good news is that we  have policies, as i mentioned in my remarks—we have policies that can address those things, but not perfectly. so that’s—that’s another risk. the third thing i would point to is just the global dimension. this is a very global phenomenon, and you are—we’re seeing economic data from around the globe which is very, very negative, and that, too, can weigh on u.s. economic performance over time. i—you know, i would say, just on the u.s.—on the u.s. economy, there are things you can say, one can say. the first is that, in the near term, we’re going to see, you know, significant declines in economic activity, significant declines in employment, and increases in unemployment. we’re going to see that as a consequence of the virus and the measures we’re taking to protect ourselves from it. the next phases are more uncertain, highly uncertain, but we will go through a phase starting fairly soon where we begin to reopen the economy. and probably the economic activity will pick up as consumer spending picks up. consumer spending, as i mentioned, has gone down quite a lot. it’ll begin to pick up as people start to return to their normal patterns of spending. but the chances are that it won’t go right back to where we were, because people will—until they’re confident of—that the virus is well and truly under control, then they will be somewhat probably reluctant to—to undertake certain kinds of activity. so it may take some time for us to get back—it probably will take some time for us to get back to—you know, to a more normal level of unemployment and—and, ultimately, to maximum employment. michelle smith. okay, james politi. james politi. thanks, chair powell. you didn’t firm up your guidance on—this is james politi from the financial times—you didn’t firm up your guidance on interest rates at this meeting. and given the risks that you just outlined, under what circumstances would you strengthen the fed’s commitment to keep rates at the lower bound? and is there any danger to  delaying—delaying that plan? then, on the credit facilities, what kind of demand are you expecting for the programs that were set up under the cares act, and are you expecting them to rapidly reach capacity like the ppp plan did? chair powell. okay. so on the first, as i mentioned, you know, we moved very quickly, very aggressively. we were the first to return to the effective lower bound, where we are now. we got there essentially right away, and we think that’s the right place to be. we think, if you look at surveys, you look at market pricing, the market expects us to—to be there for a good while, and that’s appropriate. so, you know, it’s not as though the market is pricing in a near-term liftoff or anything like that. and let me just say, we’re going to not be in any hurry to withdraw these measures or to lift off. we’re going to wait until we’re—we’re quite confident that the economy is—is well on the road to recovery. so we don’t see—we see our current stance and our current guidance—and i would say the same thing about asset purchases—we see them as appropriate. i’ve—i’ve also mentioned now a couple times that we have done a lot of thinking about what monetary policy might look like over coming months, and that would, you know, depend on—on where we are in—in a range of potential economic scenarios. so we—we were thinking about that all the time, but right now, for now, we think our current stance is appropriate. so we made no change in it today. second question was, how—so the thing about our facilities is, treasury still has plenty of equity. so we’ve said that if—if demand for our facilities is greater than we’ve estimated, then we’ll expand them. and we have the ability to do that. so it won’t be the way the—the paycheck protection program is, where there’s a specific amount allocated—appropriated for it, and—and then there’s no more money. that’s—that will be unlikely to happen here unless we exhaust treasury’s equity, and we’re a long way from doing that.  the second thing i would say is—and you’ve all seen this—is when we announce these facilities—and i mentioned this in my remarks—it’s not just the actual lending we do, it’s the— we build confidence in the market. and private market participants come in. and many companies that would’ve had to come to the fed have now been able to finance themselves privately since we announced the—the initial term sheet on—on these facilities. so that’s a good thing. companies are out there financing, they’re out there raising liquidity. we haven’t made any corporate loans to—in those facilities. we’ve made the short-term money market loans, but—we haven’t made any of them. and yet there’s a tremendous amount of financing going on, and that’s a good thing. so we—for that reason, the ultimate demand for the facilities is quite difficult to predict, because there is this announcement effect that really gets the market functioning again. of course, we have to follow through, though. and we will follow through to validate that—that announcement effect. michelle smith. okay, howard schneider. howard schneider. oh, hi, chair powell, and thanks for doing this. i wanted to get your—a little more expansion on the timing of recovery and the—the connection between the health response. you said earlier, i think, that you thought the second half of the year could see a pretty robust rebound. is that now out of the question? and do you think a steady recovery is really possible until a vaccine’s developed, given the patchwork of measures we’ve seen taken around the states? is that going to really lead us to a steady path out, absent a vaccine? chair powell. you know, as you know, economic forecasts are always uncertain. today they’re unusually uncertain, and that’s—that’s really because so much of the performance of the economy depends on the path of the virus and the success of the measures we take to  control it, our success in reopening the economy, and also the time it takes to develop new drugs. and our tools, the things that we do, don’t affect any of those things. we’re not experts on those things either, but what the experts tell us is that the outcomes are highly uncertain. so this is an unusual, new kind of uncertainty added on top of our—our regular uncertainty. but i—i will say, there—i think there are a few things that you can say about—about the path ahead. first, this time, now, is going to be a time of sharp contraction in economic activity, high unemployment. personal consumption expenditures have declined sharply, business investment as well. unemployment moved up. we’re going to see economic data for the second quarter that’s worse than any data we’ve seen for the economy. and they’re a direct consequence of the disease and the measures that we’re taking to protect ourselves from it. so then we will enter this new phase, and we—we’re just beginning to maybe do that, where we will—formal measures that require social distancing will be rolled back gradually and at different paces in different parts of the country. and, in time, this—during this period, the economy will begin to recover. people will come out of their homes, start to spend again. we’ll see unemployment go down, we’ll see economic activity pick up. and, you know, when will that be? it’s very hard to say. but let’s just say, for this purpose, that it’s in the third quarter. so, as i mentioned earlier, that—that could be a fairly, you know, a large increase. given the— given the size of the fall, the increase could also be substantially large, although it’s unlikely that it would bring us quickly, quickly all the way back to pre-crisis levels. of course, this is the period as well that carries the risk of new outbreaks of the virus, something we really want to avoid. i think then, after that period, at some point you will have—you know, the kind of formal social-distancing measures will—will be gone, but you’ll still be left with, probably, a level of  caution on the part of people who will—who will worry and probably keep worrying for some— for some time. you would think that behavior will change as people gain confidence. so the— the sooner we get the virus under control, the sooner people can regain that confidence and regain their economic activity. i think trying to be really precise about when that might happen and what the numbers might look like is—i think it’s very tough to do that. michelle smith. okay, steve matthews. steve matthews. steve matthews with bloomberg. chairman powell, you’ve noted a number of times over the last year that there’s been a broadening out of job gains with marginalized workers, people who have been left out of the recovery over the 10-year period, finally making job gains, and—particularly minorities, but also many other workers. do you worry that this recession is going to fall hardest on those workers who’ve struggled and just got job gains in the last year or two, and that it may take years from now before there are opportunities for them again? chair powell. yes. that’s exactly what i worry about. so unemployment has tended to go up much faster for minorities and for others who are—tend to be at the low end of the income spectrum. and it tends to come down—come down faster as well, but it tends to go up faster and be much, much higher. and we were in a place—only two months ago, we were well into—beginning the second half of the 11th year is where we were, and every reason to think that it was ongoing. we were hearing from minority—low- and moderate-income and minority communities that this was the best labor market they’d seen in their lifetime. all the data supported that as well. and it is heartbreaking, frankly, to see that all threatened now. all the more need for our urgent response—and also that of congress, which has been urgent and large—and to do what we can to avoid longer-run damage to the economy, which is what i—i  mentioned earlier. this is an exogenous event that—you know, just, it happened to us. it wasn’t because there was something wrong with the economy. and i think it is important that we do everything we can to avoid that longer-run damage and try to get back to where we were, because i do very much have that concern. i think everyone is suffering here, but i think those who are least able to—to bear it are the ones who are, you know, losing their jobs and losing their incomes and have little cushion to—you know, to protect them in times like that. so, yes, that’s a very big concern. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi, i’m victoria guida with politico. the paycheck protection program has experienced some logistical problems because of the speed at which all of this is happening. for the main street lending facilities, which will also work through banks, what lessons are you taking away from that? and then, more broadly, you know, you mentioned earlier this year that the federal debt was on an unsustainable path. and i was just wondering, for republicans that are starting to get worried about how much fiscal spending they’re having to do in this crisis, you know, whether that should be a concern for them. chair powell. so a couple things. this is different from the ppp, the paycheck protection program, in two ways. one is, these are not grants, these are loans. so i don’t know that the demand will be quite as strong as—as it has been for the ppp. i don’t know that. and the second thing is, we won’t run out of money. you know, it’s not a limited pot, so there won’t be this incentive to try to get there first and that sort of thing. so i’m—i’m hopeful we—we will very much try to learn as much as possible from that facility and from all the other ones, too. we have a lot to learn here, so we’ll certainly be trying to do that.  in terms of fiscal concern, so i—you know, i’m—for many years, i’ve been, before the fed, i have longtime been an advocate for the need for the united states to return to a sustainable path from a fiscal perspective at the federal level. we have not been on such a path for some time, which means—just means that the debt is growing faster than the economy. this is not the time to act on those concerns. this is the time to use the great fiscal power of the united states to—to do what we can to support the economy and try to get through this with as little damage to the longer-run productive capacity of the economy as possible. the time will come again—and reasonably soon, i think—where we can—where we can think about a long-term way to get our fiscal house in order. and we absolutely need to do that. but this is not the time to be—in my personal view, this is not the time to—to let that concern, which is a very serious concern, but—to let that get in the way of us winning this battle, really. michelle smith. okay, edward lawrence. edward lawrence. oh, yes. thank you, mr. chairman. edward lawrence from fox business network. now, given the amount of stimulus on the fiscal side and monetary policy side, how much weight do you give to finding a vaccine, from clearing that uncertainty you talked about around treatment and whatnot, for the federal reserve pulling back on some of the fed’s actions and raising the rates from the zero lower bound? also, when does that main street lending facility get deployed? because you talked about “soon”—you know, some businesses are in need now. thank you. chair powell. you know, so we don’t—we’re not in a position to make, you know, a reliable assessment of when a vaccine or a therapeutic drug would be ready, and so we’re not going to set our policies based on—on our estimate of that. we’re going to just provide the  support that we can with the tools that we have, and we’re going to keep doing that until—until the recovery’s well under way. in terms of main street, so you know the story. we put out a term sheet, we got a lot of comments, we took those very much to heart. we’ve spent a great deal of time here. it’s a challenging space, because it’s many different kinds of borrowers—they have different needs, different sizes of companies. and so, we’re—as i mentioned, we’re very close to announcing a new term sheet, which will then become operative fairly quickly. my guess is, though, that we’ll keep—we’ll keep looking to add products and add different kinds of borrowers to that as we go. and we’re—we’re well aware of the importance of—of doing it as quickly as possible. we, here, you know, we’re very much in touch with—with the urgency of that need. michelle smith. okay, don lee. don lee. chair powell, it’s don lee from the l.a. times. i just wanted to follow up on a question—the question on the labor market. i know you said that it’s highly uncertain but, you know, there are analysts who think that we’ll have very high unemployment until even the end of next year, as high as 9 percent. and, at this point, what—can you just talk a little bit more about what you see as the path of employment in the coming months and into next year? chair powell. sure. so unemployment’s going to go up to a high number in the second quarter—uncertain what the number will be. when—and that’s because so much economic activity has been shuttered, really, as we take social-distancing measures. and the— so sometime fairly soon here, and probably gradually and at different paces at different parts of the country, we’ll see the social-distancing measures rolled back. people will begin to spend more money. it’s, really, consumer spending has fallen precipitously. and once that starts to happen, people will get hired back and unemployment will go back down. i don’t think it’ll get  anywhere near the historically low levels that we had in—as recently as february, 3½ percent. i think it will take some time for that to happen, for us to get back to anything that resembles maximum employment. but, i mean, the main thing we want is, we want to get back on that road. we want to get that—that recovery going and get people back to work as fast as we can. not faster than we can, but as fast as we can. the main thing is to get into that stage where the economy’s healing, where we have the disease under control, where we don’t, you know, take too much risk of—of second and third waves and that sort of thing, and get people back to work. and, you know, it’s—again, the path of it is highly uncertain, but we will—we will be there with our tools, supporting the economy and supporting that recovery. michelle smith. scott horsley. scott horsley. thanks, mr. chairman. after the financial crisis, banks were instructed to up their capital so they could weather an economic shock. what kind of steps do you think we need to take for the economy writ large to make it more resilient to this kind of shock? chair powell. can you just say that part—you’re a little bit low volume. scott horsley. yes. what kind of steps could we take to help the economy as a whole be more resilient to this kind of exogenous shock? chair powell. you know, it’s an extraordinary, extraordinary shock, unlike anything, certainly, that’s happened in my lifetime. and a couple things come to mind. i—i think the time will come for a careful assessment of the answers to those questions. it’s early to be asking them. we’re still putting out the fire. we’re still trying to win. and i think we’ll be at that for a while.  you know, but i’d point to a couple of directions. you know, we worked hard to strengthen the banks: much higher levels of capital, liquidity, far greater sense of what the risks are they’re running and how to manage them. so the breakdowns that we’ve seen in market function have really been in the capital markets. and i don’t—i wouldn’t rush in with prudential regulation into the capital markets. but i think—and we did plenty of things—you know, triparty—you know, we did a lot of reform in the capital markets: money market reform, triparty repo reform, central clearing, all these important things. but there—there will no doubt be— with this—the size and force of this shock will no doubt reveal weaknesses in the financial architecture, and we’ll have to go to work on those. i—i also think it—you know, it tells you the importance of—of getting your fiscal house in order. the u.s. really hadn’t—really hadn’t gotten back to where we needed to get on fiscal policy. and, you know, so we—we had an already high level of debt to gdp, and rising quickly, when this shock arrived. now, we have the fiscal capacity to deal with it, i believe. but we will need to—ideally, you would go into an unexpected shock like this with a—with a much stronger fiscal—fiscal posture. michelle smith. mike mckee. michael mckee. mr. chairman, given the demand drop, demand shock, and the drop in oil prices, do you anticipate that we might see any kind of deflation, even for a very short period, that would require a fed response? if we get a negative print on cpi or pce, how should people think about that? and second question—there is a disconnect, it appears, between the markets and the economic outlook right now. and i know you said that this isn’t the time to worry about moral  hazard, but do you worry, with the size of stimulus that you and the congress are putting into the economy, there could be financial stability problems as this goes along? chair powell. in terms of inflation, we think that inflation is very closely and strongly related to inflation expectations. and during the global financial crisis, there was a concern that we might see deflation, but it didn’t happen. inflation expect—inflation tended to move down a little bit, as it will when demand is weak. and—but inflation expectations did not move strongly down here in the united states. they have in other places in the world, though, over the past 25 years. there’s been downward pressure on inflation, really, for several decades now. so, i would say, as long as inflation expectations remain anchored, then we shouldn’t see deflation. and the federal reserve is strongly committed to maintaining 2 percent inflation over time. so we’ll be there to work on that. i think you asked, really, about headline inflation. if— if low energy prices—very low energy prices were to—were to drop headline inflation negative, i—i would hope that people would see through that—and we’ll be monitoring it very carefully— would see through it, though, and look to core, which is a better predictor of future inflation. so, needless to say, we’ll be keeping very close track of that. in terms of the markets, you know, our—our concern is that they be working. we’re not—we’re not focused on the level of asset prices in particular, it’s just—markets are trying to price in something that is so uncertain as to be unknowable, which is the path of this virus globally and its effect on the economy. and that’s very, very hard to do. that’s why you see volatility the way it’s been, market reacting to—to things with a lot of volatility. but, you know, what we’re trying to assure, really, is that the market is working. the market is assessing risks, lenders are lending, borrowers are borrowing, asset prices are moving in response to events.  that’s—that is really important for everybody, including—including, you know, the—the most vulnerable among us, because if—if markets stop working and credit stops flowing, then you see—that’s when you see, you know, very sharp negative—even more negative economic outcomes. so i think our measures have—have supported market function pretty well. you know, we’re going to stay very careful, carefully monitoring that. but i think it’s been good to see markets working again. particularly, the flow of credit in the economy has been a positive thing, as businesses have been able to build up their liquidity buffers and households have been able to be home—you know, people have been home, you know, concerned about their jobs, but they’re not concerned about the financial system collapsing as they were in 2008 and ’09. michelle smith. okay, chris from the ap. christopher rugaber. hi, chair powell. chris rugaber over at ap, thank you. i guess i had two questions. i wanted to start on the unemployment picture and nail down a little bit how you see—how you see things going from here. you did talk about potential loss of skills over time. so are you worried about structural changes in job markets that would keep unemployment high and, therefore, potentially beyond the ability of the fed to do anything about, which is something that was debated, as you know, after the last recession, and then eventually, of course, the unemployment rate did go lower than people thought? second question is just on the money from treasury, the $454 billion. it sounds like you want to keep that in reserve for programs that have high demand, such as the main street program. are you willing to use that to backstop, say, a program that is having more losses? i mean, you know, what’s your tolerance for loss among that $454 billion? thank you.  chair powell. so, in terms of the labor market, the—the risk to—of damage to people’s skills and their careers and their lives is a function of time to some extent. so the longer one is unemployed, the harder it gets, i think—and we’ve probably all seen this in our lives—the harder it is to get back into the workforce and get back to where you were, if you ever do get back to where you were. so, you know, longer and deeper downturns have had—have left more of a mark, generally, in that dimension with the labor force. and so that’s why—as i mentioned, that’s why the urgency in doing what we can to prevent that longer-run damage. it doesn’t have to be that way. we won’t be able to limit all of it, but we do have the tools to—to do what we can to—to keep people in touch with the labor force and working and also out of insolvency, too. it doesn’t seem fair that people should lose everything they have, including their homes, over this. so, nonetheless, there will be some of that. but we do have some tools to ameliorate that. in terms of the—so in terms of the—the money, you know, the $454 billion, it’s a couple things. first, the treasury secretary really has—has authority over that, right? and it stands in front of our losses. so, you know—but i do think we are—we’re clearly moving into areas where there is more risk than there has been in the past. and that’s okay. i think that’s what we’re supposed to do. this is—this is a very unusual time. and so—but in terms of the—of the way to think about that money, i think that’s really a question for the treasury department. you know, we are—we set up the facilities, and we work very, very closely and successfully and collaboratively with the treasury on this, but that—that particular aspect of it falls more to the secretary. michelle smith. okay, we’ll go to nancy marshall-genzer for the last question. nancy marshall-genzer. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. chair powell, i’m wondering what you would say to savers who are hurt by very low interest rates and  maybe going into investments maybe in the stock market that aren’t so great for them. and also, i’m wondering if you can give us any more of a clue as to how long you think we’re going to have interest rates near zero. chair powell. so we think that low interest rates affect the economy through a number of channels in a positive way. lower interest rates support economic activity through channels that we—overall, through channels that we understand reasonably well. they make it cheaper to borrow, they make—they drive, you know, your costs of borrowing down. they do—they do raise asset prices, including the value of your home. if your saver owns a home or has a 401(k), your saver will benefit from that. but for people who are really, really just relying on their bank savings account earnings, this is—you know, that’s—that’s—you’re not going to benefit from low interest rates. but we—you know, we have to look out for the overall economy. low interest rates support employment, they support economic activity, and those are our mandates. and i think for the overall good of the economy, low interest rates are a good thing. and that’s not to say they’re good for every single person, but that shouldn’t stop us from doing what we think is—is good for the whole. in terms of how low, i really don’t want to speculate. you know, we will turn to questions like that soon enough. but the—in terms of how long we’ll stay and under what conditions we’ll stay at the effective lower bound, those are just exactly the things we’re thinking about. right now we like the place we are. we’ve said that we’ll keep our rates where they are until we’re confident that the economy has weathered the effects of the outbreak and is on track to achieve our—our goals. so that’s where we are. we’re leaving—we’re not changing that  guidance today, you know, but it’ll be—that means we’re going to be very patient. that means we’re—we’re not going to be in any hurry to move rates up. michelle smith. thank you very much. chair powell. thanks.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations the system open market account (soma) manager first discussed developments in financial markets. financial conditions had shown notable improvement over recent weeks. equity price indexes were up substantially from the lows of late march, safe-haven demands for the dollar had receded, and measures of realized and implied volatility across markets had diminished. market participants pointed to swift and forceful actions taken by the federal reserve, coupled with strong fiscal measures, and some indications of a slowing in the spread of the coronavirus (covid-19) in major economies as factors contributing to these developments. that said, market participants remained very uncertain about the economic outlook, and contacts highlighted an array of remaining risks, including those in corporate credit markets, emerging markets, and mortgage markets. in corporate credit markets, concerns about potential defaults were rising, and ratings agencies had put on negative watch or downgraded many issuers. in emerging markets, the steep decline in commodity prices was exacerbating financial pressures for some emerging market economies (emes), which were also facing strains arising from capital outflows and a reduction in trade activity. and in mortgage markets, the likely increase in mortgage delinquencies associated with forbearance polices and an eventual rise in defaults were sources of concern for bank and nonbank lenders. open market desk surveys suggested that market participants anticipated a sharp near-term decline in economic activity, followed by some recovery later this year. against this backdrop, market participants generally expected the target range for the federal funds rate to remain at the effective lower bound for the next couple of years. respondents to desk surveys attached almost no probability to the fomc implementing negative policy rates. some survey respondents indicated that they expected modifications to the committee’s forward guidance, but not at the current meeting. the manager then reviewed recent open market operations. since mid-march, at the direction of the fomc, the desk had purchased very large quantities of treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) in order to support the smooth functioning of these critical markets. the desk evaluated a broad array of indicators to assess market functioning. these indicators suggested considerable improvement in market functioning, and the desk gradually scaled back the pace of purchases accordingly. market participants anticipated that the pace of purchases would slow after the june meeting, but they expected that outright securities holdings in the soma portfolio would continue to expand at least through the end of the year. the soma manager expected that, if  minutes of the meeting of april 28–29, 2020 page 3 conditions continued to improve, the pace of purchases could be reduced somewhat further; however, consistent with the directive, the desk was prepared to increase purchases as needed should market functioning worsen. conditions in money markets had improved over recent weeks. the intense strains across a range of short-term funding markets that emerged in march had subsided. the expansion of federal reserve repurchase agreement (repo) operations, the enhancement and expansion of funding available through the discount window and swap lines, and the funding provided through the primary dealer credit facility (pdcf), the money market mutual fund liquidity facility (mmlf), and the commercial paper funding facility (cpff) were likely important in relieving pressures across a range of shortterm funding markets. the manager noted that, despite these improvements, rates in some term funding markets remained elevated, although forward measures suggested the upward pressure on these rates might ease in coming weeks. with conditions in short-term funding markets having improved substantially and with repo operations no longer needed to maintain ample reserve levels, the manager noted that it might be appropriate to position the federal reserve’s repurchase operations in a backstop role. for example, the minimum bid rate in repo operations could be increased somewhat relative to the level of the interest rate on excess reserves (the ioer rate). later in the intermeeting period, short-term interest rates drifted lower and settled at near-zero levels. although rates appeared stable, the manager suggested that circumstances could arise in which temporarily raising the per-counterparty limit on the overnight reverse repo operation would support policy implementation. the manager also noted that some market participants anticipated that the federal reserve might increase the ioer rate in order to move the federal funds rate closer to the middle of the target range and to address market functioning issues that could arise over time with overnight rates at very low levels. however, there appeared to be limited risk that the federal funds rate would move below the target range, as the federal home loan banks— the dominant lenders in the federal funds market—can earn a zero rate on balances maintained in their account at the federal reserve. moreover, there were few signs to date that the low level of overnight funding rates had adversely affected market functioning, and trading volumes remained robust. the soma manager noted that the staff would continue to monitor developments. the committee voted unanimously to renew the reciprocal currency arrangements with the bank of canada and the bank of mexico; these arrangements are associated with the federal reserve’s participation in the north american framework agreement of 1994. in addition, the committee voted unanimously to renew the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the bank of canada, the bank of england, the bank of japan, the european central bank, and the swiss national bank. the votes to renew the federal reserve’s participation in these standing arrangements occur annually at the april or may fomc meeting. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the coronavirus outbreak and the measures taken to protect public health were severely disrupting economic activity in the united states and abroad. the available information for the april 28–29 meeting indicated that u.s. labor market conditions deteriorated substantially in march and april, and real gross domestic product (gdp) declined sharply in the first quarter of the year. in addition, a variety of economic indicators were already pointing toward an extraordinary contraction in gdp in the second quarter. consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce), remained below 2 percent in february. job losses surged in march, even though the drop in total nonfarm payroll employment reflected only those changes that had occurred through the mid-month reference period of the establishment survey. in addition, the unemployment rate jumped to 4.4 percent in march, and the labor force participation rate decreased notably. after economic shutdowns started to occur on a widespread basis, initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits skyrocketed in the second half of march through the first half of april, a development that pointed to substantial job losses in april. nominal wage growth remained moderate, as average hourly earnings for all employees increased 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending in march. total pce price inflation and core pce price inflation, which excludes consumer food and energy prices, both increased 1.8 percent over the 12 months ending in february. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank  page 4 federal open market committee of dallas was 2.0 percent in february. the consumer price index (cpi) rose 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending in march, and the core cpi increased 2.1 percent over the same period. the total cpi rose less than the core cpi mostly because of substantial declines in consumer energy prices, which were reflecting significantly lower crude oil prices. recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. the university of michigan surveys of consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years edged up in april, and the 3-year-ahead measure from the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations edged down in march; both measures remained in their recent ranges. real pce declined steeply in the first quarter of the year. the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate pce, along with the sales of light motor vehicles, fell substantially in march, reflecting the effects of the widespread economic shutdowns. moreover, the consumer sentiment measures from both the michigan and the conference board surveys deteriorated substantially over march and april. real disposable personal income was about flat in the first quarter, so the personal saving rate moved up notably with the decline in spending. in contrast to other sectors of the economy, real residential investment expanded strongly in the first quarter as a whole, although housing-sector activity had started to slow dramatically late in the quarter. starts and building permit issuance for single-family homes, along with starts of multifamily units, tumbled in march. in addition, sales of both new and existing homes contracted sharply in march, and survey measures of builders’ sentiment plunged in april. real business fixed investment slumped in the first quarter following moderate declines over the previous three quarters. spending for business equipment fell considerably in the first quarter, led by a sharp decrease in purchases of transportation equipment. business investment in nonresidential structures also dropped notably. the coronavirus outbreak and the effects on economic activity of measures to contain it, together with the associated elevated level of uncertainty, were likely reflected in recent downbeat readings on business sentiment in national and regional surveys and appeared to weigh heavily on business investment. in addition, the effects of substantial further declines in crude oil prices were being seen in the falling number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation through late april, an indicator of business spending on structures in the drilling and mining sector. total industrial production fell precipitously in march, as the coronavirus outbreak led many factories to close late in the month. the decline in manufacturing output was led by a pullback in the production of motor vehicles and related parts. output in the mining sector— which includes crude oil extraction—also decreased significantly in the wake of the recent declines in crude oil prices. total real government purchases only edged up in the first quarter, led by a modest increase in federal purchases. state and local purchases were about flat, reflecting the effects of public school closures beginning in mid-march. real exports declined sharply in the first quarter. however, imports declined at a much faster rate so that net exports made a sizable positive contribution to gdp growth. much of the quarterly decline in trade volumes reflected a sharp drop in march due to weak demand globally and disruptions related to the coronavirus outbreak. the fall in exports was concentrated in services, particularly those parts of the sector held down by travel restrictions. foreign economic activity fell sharply in the first quarter of the year amid widespread mandatory business shutdowns and strict social-distancing measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus outbreak. in china, where lockdowns were first implemented, real gdp contracted sharply in the first quarter, and canada, korea, and singapore also saw substantial declines. monthly indicators suggested that activity also plummeted in march and april in many other economies, particularly in the euro area and the united kingdom, which both saw purchasing managers indexes fall to record-low levels. many foreign governments announced large fiscal packages to address the sudden loss of income by firms and households. many foreign central banks cut policy rates, initiated or enhanced credit facilities, relaxed capital requirements for financial institutions, and ramped up asset purchase programs to alleviate liquidity concerns in foreign capital markets. foreign inflation fell steeply, reflecting large drops in energy prices related to plunging oil prices, while core inflation pressures generally remained muted.  minutes of the meeting of april 28–29, 2020 page 5 staff review of the financial situation in the middle part of march, financial markets experienced record declines in the prices of risky assets, widespread illiquidity, and elevated volatility, as uncertainty regarding the effects of the coronavirus outbreak on the global economy jumped. however, following the announcement and subsequent launching of a number of federal reserve emergency liquidity programs, the passage of the cares act (coronavirus aid, relief, and economic security act), and early signs of a decline in outbreak intensity in the united states and many major foreign economies, the extreme volatility and illiquidity subsided and prices of most risky assets increased notably. over the intermeeting period, on net, the s&p 500 index rose, option-implied volatility fell, and treasury yields declined, while corporate bond spreads widened somewhat. financing conditions for businesses, households, and state and local governments were strained over the intermeeting period. however, the federal reserve’s announcements and start-ups of emergency liquidity facilities appeared to improve conditions in many of these markets. these facilities were established with the approval of the secretary of the treasury under the authority of section 13(3) of the federal reserve act and were designed to support the flow of credit to businesses, households, and state and local governments. treasury markets experienced extreme volatility in midmarch, and market liquidity became substantially impaired as investors sold large volumes of medium- and long-term treasury securities. following a period of extraordinarily rapid purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs by the federal reserve, treasury market liquidity gradually improved through the remainder of the intermeeting period, and treasury yields became less volatile. although market depth remained exceptionally low and bid-ask spreads for off-the-run securities and long-term on-the-run securities remained elevated, bidask spreads for short-term on-the-run securities fell close to levels seen earlier in the year. yields on nominal treasury securities declined across the maturity spectrum, with the 10- and 30-year yields ending the period near all-time lows. a straight read of market quotes suggested that the expected federal funds rate would remain under 25 basis points through 2022. measures of inflation compensation based on treasury inflationprotected securities (tips) ended the period higher, on net, but were still low by historical standards. inflation compensation fell sharply in the first half of march but subsequently recovered, as overall financial conditions and tips liquidity improved. the market for agency mbs also experienced substantial stresses in mid-march, and agency mbs spreads to treasury yields widened and were volatile. however, market conditions for agency mbs improved significantly in the second half of march, supported by the federal reserve’s additional purchases of these securities. stock price indexes were exceptionally volatile early in the intermeeting period, and one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500 index reached a record high. equity market volatility moved down substantially over the remainder of the intermeeting period but remained elevated, and equity prices more than retraced their earlier declines to end the intermeeting period notably higher. broad stock price index increases over the intermeeting period were led by the energy, consumer discretionary, basic materials, and health-care sectors. broad equity price indexes remained, however, markedly below peaks registered earlier this year. corporate bond spreads over comparable-maturity treasury yields widened sharply in the beginning of the intermeeting period, and they subsequently retraced most of their increases to end up only somewhat higher on net. corporate bond spreads at the end of the intermeeting period still stood significantly above their levels in january. in short-term funding markets, strains intensified in mid-march. spreads of yields of term money market instruments over comparable-maturity overnight index swap rates increased sharply, and issuance of unsecured commercial paper, negotiable certificates of deposit, and short-term municipal debt declined substantially and shifted to very short maturities. institutional prime money market funds (mmfs) experienced heavy redemptions and reportedly faced difficulties selling assets amid impaired secondary-market liquidity. the announcements and start-ups of several federal reserve emergency liquidity facilities in the second half of march helped stabilize short-term funding markets, and, by the end of the intermeeting period, spreads had narrowed across the board. repo rates were elevated in midmarch but normalized following the very large inflows of funds into government mmfs, the expansion of the federal reserve’s repo operations, and the announcement of the pdcf. the effective federal funds rate was at the top of the target range for a few days following the march fomc meeting and, after declining in the second half of march, stayed at around 5 basis points for most of april. early in the period, cascading shutdowns in many countries weighed heavily on risk sentiment abroad. many foreign financial markets experienced severe illiquidity and substantial volatility, and foreign equity indexes  page 6 federal open market committee posted large declines. however, extraordinary monetary and fiscal policy actions in the united states and abroad helped improve market sentiment, and most major foreign equity indexes subsequently rebounded notably. that said, compared with early this year, foreign equity indexes stayed sharply lower, and option-implied equity volatility abroad remained elevated. advanced-economy sovereign yields were also volatile, but most sovereign yields ended the period somewhat lower. by the end of the intermeeting period, policy rates in most major advanced foreign economies (afes) were at or near their effective lower bounds. in mid-march, emerging market bond index (embi) spreads widened sharply, and capital outflows from emes reached record levels. as global sentiment improved somewhat, those capital outflows slowed and embi spreads partially retraced earlier increases. strong demand for dollars amid flight to safety globally, together with disruptions in u.s. short-term funding markets, caused severe strains in funding markets for dollars abroad, especially early in the intermeeting period. the premiums paid by investors to borrow dollars using the foreign exchange swap market over the costs of directly borrowing dollars widened sharply as the end of the first quarter approached. fomc actions, including several changes to the standing central bank liquidity swap lines and a temporary expansion in the number of central bank counterparties, as well as the announcement of the fima (foreign and international monetary authorities) repo facility, notably improved conditions in the foreign exchange swap market. nonetheless, conditions in this market remained strained. over the period, the staff’s broad dollar index increased, with the dollar appreciating modestly against afe currencies and notably against eme currencies. currencies of vulnerable commodity exporters, such as mexico and brazil, depreciated sharply. at the end of the intermeeting period, the broad dollar index remained significantly higher than at the beginning of the year. financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses were strained in march, particularly for lower-rated firms and small businesses. federal reserve announcements of facilities to support the flow of credit to businesses, households, and state and local governments appeared to improve financing conditions in many markets, although conditions had yet to normalize. issuance of speculative-grade bonds and leveraged loans was extremely low in march but resumed, at a slow pace, in april. investment-grade issuance, while relatively slow in early march, was robust following the federal reserve’s announcements in late march of the primary market corporate credit facility and the secondary market corporate credit facility. conditions in the market for corporate bonds and loans improved further in response to the federal reserve’s announcement in april that it would expand these facilities to include firms that had been recently downgraded to just below investmentgrade status. commercial and industrial (c&i) lending conditions were somewhat tight. although c&i loans increased strongly, this increase was largely driven by firms drawing down existing lines of credit; they reportedly did so to shore up liquidity for precautionary motives and to meet funding needs. in the april senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported having tightened their c&i lending standards and terms for firms of all sizes. credit quality and the earnings outlook of nonfinancial corporations deteriorated substantially, and market analysts forecast a large volume of downgrades of nonfinancial corporate bonds, including a substantial volume from triple-b to speculative grade. credit conditions for small businesses were tight. concerns about the finances of state and local governments contributed to a marked deterioration in credit conditions in the municipal bond market in march. although strains lessened amid federal reserve announcements on emergency lending facilities to support the flow of credit and liquidity to state and local governments—specifically, expansions to the mmlf and the cpff and the establishment of the municipal liquidity facility—spreads remained high and issuance subdued at the end of the intermeeting period. financing conditions for commercial real estate (cre) were strained. non-agency commercial mortgagebacked securities (cmbs) issuance shut down, although secondary-market spreads narrowed following the extension of the term asset-backed securities loan facility (talf) to include non-agency cmbs as eligible collateral. meanwhile, agency cmbs issuance continued, supported by the federal reserve’s purchases of these securities. most april sloos respondents reported having tightened lending standards for cre loans. cre loans on banks’ books increased in the second half of march, in part because banks were unable to securitize some nonresidential loans. financing conditions in residential mortgage markets were tight for low-rated borrowers and other borrowers who rely on nonconforming mortgages. many mortgage originators and warehouse lenders announced tighter  minutes of the meeting of april 28–29, 2020 page 7 underwriting standards on new originations. despite a considerable widening of the spread between the primary mortgage rate and mbs yields, primary mortgage interest rates were low by historical standards, and available indicators suggested that refinancing activity remained elevated. the volume of mortgage rate locks for home-purchase loans dropped materially in early april, reflecting in part declines in homebuyer demand and disruptions in the home search and purchase process. financing conditions in consumer credit markets tightened somewhat on net. spreads on consumer assetbacked securities jumped in mid-march, and primarymarket issuance came to a halt. however, in response to the announcement of the talf and to diminished broader financial market uncertainty, spreads retraced most of their increase in the early part of the period, and primary-market issuance resumed. though banks in the april sloos reported tightening standards on new consumer loans, respondents also experienced weaker demand for all consumer loan types. auto loan interest rates dropped sharply in early april as manufacturers introduced attractive financing programs to boost sales. the staff assessed the stability of the financial system during the coronavirus outbreak. the banking sector, including the large banks, was resilient coming into this period. banks were able to meet surging demand for draws on credit lines while also building loan loss reserves to absorb higher expected defaults. in other parts of the financial system, however, some notable vulnerabilities that had been identified in previous financial stability assessments exacerbated financial strains. in march, institutional prime mmfs and other institutions relying on unstable funding sources faced significant stress, a situation that put in jeopardy the orderly functioning of some financial markets. federal reserve actions to enhance the liquidity and functioning of key markets reduced these stresses notably. open-end mutual funds that invest in corporate bonds and loans— institutions that typically face a timing mismatch between investors’ ability to redeem shares and the funds’ ability to sell assets—experienced heavy outflows and liquidity strains in mid-march. redemptions later eased, however, amid the general improvement in financial markets. business debt, which appeared to be high compared with fundamentals before the coronavirus outbreak, seemed poised to rise further as businesses borrowed to maintain their capacity to restart operations. values of cre faced the risk of large declines in response to the coronavirus outbreak, although updated readings were not yet available. the staff provided a preliminary reading on potential emerging risks to financial stability in the aftermath of the coronavirus outbreak. this reading highlighted possible vulnerabilities in mortgage servicers, insurance companies, and large, highly leveraged financial intermediaries. staff economic outlook the projection for the u.s. economy prepared by the staff for the april fomc meeting was downgraded notably from the march meeting forecast in response to information on the spread of the coronavirus and the measures undertaken to contain it both at home and abroad. u.s. real gdp was forecast to plummet and the unemployment rate to soar in the second quarter of this year. the substantial fiscal policy measures and monetary policy support that had been put in place were expected to help mitigate the deterioration in economic conditions and help boost the recovery. the staff noted that, importantly, the future performance of the economy would depend on the evolution of the coronavirus outbreak and the measures undertaken to contain it. under the staff’s baseline assumptions that the current restrictions on social interactions and business operations would ease gradually this year, real gdp was forecast to rise appreciably and the unemployment rate to decline considerably in the second half of the year, although a complete recovery was not expected by year-end. inflation was projected to weaken this year, reflecting both the deterioration in resource utilization and sizable expected declines in consumer energy prices. under the baseline assumptions, economic conditions were projected to continue to improve, and inflation to pick back up, over the next two years. the staff observed that uncertainty regarding the economic effects of the coronavirus outbreak was extremely elevated and that the historical behavior of the u.s. economy in response to past economic shocks provided limited guidance for making judgments about how the economy might evolve over coming quarters. in light of the significant uncertainty and downside risks associated with the evolution of the coronavirus outbreak, how much the economy would weaken, and how long it would take to recover, the staff judged that a more pessimistic projection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast. in this scenario, a second wave of the coronavirus outbreak, with another round of strict restrictions on social interactions and business operations, was assumed to begin around year-end, inducing a decrease in real gdp, a jump in the unemployment rate, and renewed downward pressure on inflation next year. compared with the baseline, the disruption to economic activity was more severe and protracted in this scenario,  page 8 federal open market committee with real gdp and inflation lower and the unemployment rate higher by the end of the medium-term projection. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook participants noted that the coronavirus outbreak was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. the virus and the measures taken to protect public health were inducing sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job losses. weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. the disruptions to economic activity here and abroad had significantly affected financial conditions and had impaired the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants judged that the effects of the coronavirus outbreak and the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and would pose considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. participants assessed that the second quarter would likely see overall economic activity decline at an unprecedented rate. participants relayed information from their districts that the burdens of the present crisis would fall disproportionately on the most vulnerable and financially constrained households in the economy. participants agreed that recently enacted fiscal programs were delivering valuable direct financial aid to households, businesses, and communities that would provide some relief during the economic shutdown. in addition, economic activity was being supported by actions taken by the federal reserve, including lending facilities created under the authority of section 13(3) of the federal reserve act, some of which included capital allocated by the u.s. treasury. these programs had helped maintain the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments, while supporting the smooth functioning of financial markets. regarding the economic activity of households, participants noted that the pandemic and efforts to mitigate the spread of the disease were having severely adverse effects on aggregate household spending and consumer confidence. participants reported that consumer spending had plummeted across all parts of the country and in most categories of spending, with especially sharp declines in expenditures for categories that had been most affected by social distancing, such as hotel, fuel, air travel, restaurant, theater, and other retail products and services. participants noted that even after government- imposed social-distancing restrictions came to an end, consumer spending in these categories likely would not return quickly to more normal levels. survey-based measures of consumer confidence also plunged, a development that participants and district contacts attributed to households’ concerns regarding the risk of job loss or difficulty in meeting financial obligations. participants noted that some households experiencing job losses may not immediately face lower total income because of the support from recently enacted fiscal programs. even in such cases, however, participants observed that household spending would likely be held down by a decrease in confidence and an increase in precautionary saving. participants noted that business activity and investment spending had also fallen dramatically since the previous meeting as a result of efforts to contain the coronavirus outbreak. manufacturing output declined sharply in march and was expected by participants to drop even more rapidly in april. in all districts, some businesses had been forced to close temporarily because of social distancing restrictions. businesses that were able to remain open to some degree were also substantially affected by the pandemic, with many experiencing either substantial drops in new orders and sales or supply chain disruptions. there were widespread reports from district contacts of firms reducing their payrolls and curtailing plans for investment spending. some industries were especially hard hit, including airlines, cruise ships, restaurants, and tourism. participants reported that many firms were seeking loans, payment deferrals, or grants to help address critical financial obligations and that the paycheck protection program (ppp) was providing valuable assistance to small businesses in this respect. participants also noted the disproportionate burdens or particular challenges being faced by small businesses; these challenges included lower cash buffers, fewer financing options, and, more recently, tighter lending standards. participants expressed concerns that a large number of small businesses may not be able to endure a shock that had long-lasting financial effects. participants were further concerned that even after social-distancing requirements were eased, some business models may no longer be economically viable, which could occur, for example, if consumers voluntarily continued to avoid participating in particular forms of economic activity. in addition, participants expressed concern that the possibility of secondary outbreaks of the virus may cause businesses for some time to be reluctant to engage in new projects, rehire workers, or make new capital expenditures. participants observed that conditions in the energy sector had become especially difficult. a sharp reduction  minutes of the meeting of april 28–29, 2020 page 9 in global demand for petroleum had led to unused supply that was overwhelming storage capacity, resulting in a plunge in oil prices. some participants expressed concern that low energy prices, if they were to persist, had the potential to create a wave of bankruptcies in the energy sector. in addition, the agricultural sector was under severe stress due to falling prices for some farm commodities and pandemic-related disruptions, such as the closing of some food processing plants. with regard to the labor market, participants noted that incoming data confirmed that an extreme decline in employment was under way. nationally, initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits had totaled more than 25 million from mid-march to the time of the meeting, and participants expected that the unemployment rate would soon reach the highest levels of the post–world war ii period. district contacts reported that a significant portion of workers had been able to switch to working remotely. although many employers were trying to keep workers on their payrolls, over time, as conditions persisted, there had begun to be widespread furloughs and layoffs. participants were concerned that temporary layoffs could become permanent, and that workers who lose employment could face a loss of job-specific skills or may become discouraged and exit the labor force. participants were additionally concerned that employees who were on low incomes would be the most severely affected by job cuts because they were employed in the industries most affected by the response to the outbreak or because their jobs were not amenable to being carried out remotely. with regard to inflation, participants noted that it had been running below the committee’s 2 percent longerrun objective before the coronavirus outbreak. while the pandemic had created some supply constraints, which had generated upward pressure on the prices of some goods, the pandemic had also reduced demand, which had exerted downward pressure on prices. the overall effect of the outbreak on prices was seen as disinflationary. in addition, a stronger dollar and lower oil prices were factors likely to put downward pressure on inflation, and market-based measures of inflation compensation remained very low. participants observed that the return of inflation to the committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective would likely be further delayed but that the accommodative stance of monetary policy would be helpful in achieving the 2 percent inflation objective over the longer run. participants noted that recently enacted fiscal programs were crucial for limiting the severity of the economic downturn. in particular, the cares act and other legislation, which represented more than $2 trillion in federal spending in total, had provided direct help to households, businesses, and communities. for example, the ppp was providing a financial lifeline to small businesses, the expansion of unemployment benefits was helping restore lost income for laid-off workers, and the treasury had provided a necessary financial backstop to many federal reserve lending facilities. participants acknowledged that even greater fiscal support may be necessary if the economic downturn persists. participants commented that, in addition to weighing heavily on economic activity in the near term, the economic effects of the pandemic created an extraordinary amount of uncertainty and considerable risks to economic activity in the medium term. participants discussed several alternative scenarios with regard to the behavior of economic activity in the medium term that all seemed about equally likely. these scenarios differed in the assumed length of the pandemic and the consequent economic disruptions. on the one hand, a number of participants judged that there was a substantial likelihood of additional waves of outbreak in the near or medium term. in such scenarios, it was believed likely that there would be further economic disruptions, including additional periods of mandatory social distancing, greater supply chain dislocations, and a substantial number of business closures and loss of income; in total, such developments could lead to a protracted period of severely reduced economic activity. on the other hand, economic activity could recover more quickly if the pandemic subsided enough for households and businesses to become sufficiently confident to relax or modify social-distancing behaviors over the next several months. beyond these considerations, participants noted the risk that foreign economies, particularly emes, could come under extreme pressure as a result of the pandemic and that this strain could spill over to and hamper u.s. economic activity. participants stressed that measures taken in the areas of health-care policy and fiscal policy, together with actions by the private sector, would be important in shaping the timing and speed of the u.s. economy’s return to more normal conditions. in addition, participants agreed that recent actions taken by the federal reserve were essential in helping reduce downside risks to the economic outlook. participants also noted several risks to long-term economic performance that were posed by the pandemic. one of these risks was that workers who lose employment as a result of the pandemic may experience a loss of skills, lose access to adequate childcare or eldercare,  page 10 federal open market committee or become discouraged and exit the labor force. the longer-term behavior of firms could be affected as well—for instance, if necessary but costly transmissionmitigation strategies lowered firms’ productivity; if business investment shifted down permanently; if many firms need to adjust their business models in the aftermath of the pandemic; or if business closures, particularly those of small firms, became widespread. a few participants noted that higher levels of government indebtedness, which would be exacerbated by fiscal expenditures that were necessary to combat the economic effects of the pandemic, could put downward pressure on growth in aggregate potential output. regarding developments in financial markets, participants agreed that ongoing actions by the federal reserve had been instrumental in easing strains in some essential financial markets and supporting the flow of credit. these actions included large-scale purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs, measures to reduce strains in global u.s. dollar funding markets, and the launch of programs to support the flow of credit in the economy for households, businesses of all sizes, and state and local governments. banks had entered the crisis well capitalized and had been able to provide necessary credit to businesses and households. a number of participants commented on potential risks to financial stability. participants were concerned that banks could come under greater stress, particularly if adverse scenarios for the spread of the pandemic and economic activity were realized, and so this sector should be monitored carefully. participants saw risks to banks and some other financial institutions as exacerbated by high levels of indebtedness among nonfinancial corporations that prevailed before the pandemic; this indebtedness increased these firms’ risk of insolvency. the upcoming financial stress tests for banks were seen as important for measuring the ability of large banks to withstand future downside scenarios. a number of participants emphasized that regulators should encourage banks to prepare for possible downside scenarios by further limiting payouts to shareholders, thereby preserving loss-absorbing capital. indeed, historical loss models might understate losses in this context. a few participants stressed that the activities of some nonbank financial institutions presented vulnerabilities to the financial system that could worsen in the event of a protracted economic downturn and that these institutions and activities should be monitored closely. in their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants noted that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. in light of their assessment that the ongoing public health crisis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term, all participants judged that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. keeping the target range at the effective lower bound, after quickly reducing it by 150 basis points in march, would continue to provide support to the economy and promote the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. participants also judged that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at its present level until policymakers were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. participants also assessed that it was appropriate for the federal reserve to continue to purchase treasury securities and agency residential-mortgage-backed securities (rmbs) and cmbs in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning. these open market purchases would continue to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and thereby foster the effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. in addition, the desk would continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. participants noted that it was important to continue to monitor market conditions closely and that the committee was prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate to support smooth functioning in the markets for these securities. participants also commented that the multiple lending facilities established by the federal reserve under the authority of section 13(3) of the federal reserve act and, in some cases, involving capital allocated by the treasury were supporting financial market functioning and the flow of credit to households, businesses of all sizes, and state and local governments. in this way, these emergency lending facilities were intended to help support the economy until pandemic-related credit market disruptions had abated. several participants commented further that it would be important for the federal reserve to remain ready to adjust these emergency lending facilities as appropriate based on its monitoring of financial market functioning and credit conditions.  minutes of the meeting of april 28–29, 2020 page 11 while participants agreed that the current stance of monetary policy remained appropriate, they noted that the committee could, at upcoming meetings, further clarify its intentions with respect to its future monetary policy decisions. some participants commented that the committee could make its forward guidance for the path for the federal funds rate more explicit. for example, the committee could adopt outcome-based forward guidance that would specify macroeconomic outcomes—such as a certain level of the unemployment rate or of the inflation rate—that must be achieved before the committee would consider raising the target range for the federal funds rate. the committee could also consider date-based forward guidance that would indicate that the target range could be raised only after a specified amount of time had elapsed. these participants noted that such explicit forms of forward guidance could help ensure that the public’s expectations regarding the future conduct of monetary policy continued to reflect the committee’s intentions. several participants observed that the completion, most likely later this year, of the monetary policy framework review, together with the announcement of the conclusions arising from the review, would help further clarify the committee’s intentions with respect to its future monetary policy actions. several participants also remarked that the committee may need to provide further clarity regarding its intentions for purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs; these participants noted that, without further communication on this matter, uncertainty about the evolution of the federal reserve’s asset purchases could increase over time. several participants remarked that a program of ongoing treasury securities purchases could be used in the future to keep longer-term yields low. a few participants also noted that the balance sheet could be used to reinforce the committee’s forward guidance regarding the path of the federal funds rate through federal reserve purchases of treasury securities on a scale necessary to keep treasury yields at shortto medium-term maturities capped at specified levels for a period of time. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the coronavirus outbreak was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. the virus and the measures taken to protect public health were inducing sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job losses. consumer price inflation was being held down by weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices. the disruptions to global economic activity had significantly affected financial conditions and impaired the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. members further concurred that the ongoing public health crisis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and posed considerable downside risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. in light of these developments, members decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. members noted that they expected to maintain this target range until they were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. members agreed that they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global developments and muted inflation pressures, and would use the committee’s tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, members noted that they would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to the committee’s maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, members agreed that it was appropriate for the federal reserve to continue to purchase treasury securities and agency rmbs and cmbs in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. in addition, the desk would continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. members agreed that they would closely monitor market conditions and be prepared to adjust their plans as appropriate. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.:  page 12 federal open market committee “effective april 30, 2020, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • • • • • • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs), and agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) in the amounts needed to support the smooth functioning of markets for these securities. conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs and all principal payments from holdings of agency cmbs in agency cmbs. engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. the coronavirus outbreak is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. the virus and the measures taken to protect public health are inducing sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job losses. weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices are holding down consumer price inflation. the disruptions to economic activity here and abroad have significantly affected financial conditions and have impaired the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. in light of these developments, the committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. the committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global developments and muted inflation pressures, and will use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, the committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. this assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, the federal reserve will continue to purchase treasury securities and agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. in addition, the open market desk will continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repurchase agreement operations. the committee will closely monitor market conditions and is prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, patrick harker, robert s. kaplan, neel kashkari, loretta j. mester, and randal k. quarles.  minutes of the meeting of april 28–29, 2020 page 13 voting against this action: none. • consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective april 30, 2020. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, june 9–10, 2020. the meeting adjourned at 10:10 a.m. on april 29, 2020. notation votes to address intensifying strains in global financial markets early in the intermeeting period, the committee unanimously approved the following measures to help maintain the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses: • by notation vote concluded on march 19, the committee approved amendments to the authorization for foreign currency operations (“foreign authorization”) and to the foreign currency directive (“foreign directive”). 3 the foreign authorization amendments authorized the establishment of temporary u.s. dollar liquidity arrangements (swap lines). the foreign directive was amended to direct the federal reserve bank of new york to establish and maintain temporary dollar liquidity arrangements with the reserve bank of australia, the banco central do brasil, the danmarks nationalbank (denmark), the bank of korea, the banco de mexico, the reserve bank of new zealand, the norges bank (norway), the monetary authority of singapore, and the sveriges riksbank (sweden). these arrangements will be in place for at least six months. like the federal reserve’s standing u.s. dollar liquidity swap lines with the bank of canada, the bank of england, the bank of japan, the european central bank, and the swiss national bank, these temporary arrangements should help lessen heightened strains in global u.s. dollar funding markets, thereby mitigating the effects of these strains on the supply of credit to u.s. households and businesses. committee organizational documents are available at . 3 • by notation vote concluded on march 23, the committee approved a statement indicating that the federal reserve will continue to purchase treasury securities and agency mbs in the amounts needed to support smooth market functioning and effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions and that these purchases will include agency cmbs. in conjunction with approval of the statement, the committee also authorized and directed the federal reserve bank of new york to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with these planned purchases. previously, the committee had announced that it would purchase at least $500 billion of treasury securities and at least $200 billion of agency mbs. by notation vote concluded on march 31, the committee amended the authorization for domestic open market operations to authorize, and adopted a resolution to approve, the establishment of a temporary repo facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (fima repo facility).3 the facility will be in place for at least six months and will allow fima account holders to temporarily exchange their u.s. treasury securities held with the federal reserve for u.s. dollars, which can then be made available to institutions in their jurisdictions. by providing foreign and international monetary authorities with an alternative temporary source of u.s. dollars other than sales of securities in the open market, the facility should help support the smooth functioning of the u.s. treasury market. in addition, the fima repo facility should—along with the u.s. dollar liquidity swap lines the federal reserve has established with other central banks—help ease strains in global u.s. dollar funding markets. by notation vote completed on april 7, 2020, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on march 15, 2020.  james a. clouse secretary 
une 10, 2020 chair powell. good afternoon, everyone, and thanks for joining us. our country continues to face a difficult and challenging time, as the pandemic is causing tremendous hardship here in the united states and around the world. people have lost loved ones. many millions have lost their jobs. there is great uncertainty about the future. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to using our tools to do whatever we can—and for as long as it takes—to provide some relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. the most important response to this crisis has come from our health-care workers. and on behalf of the federal reserve, let me express our sincere gratitude to those dedicated individuals who put themselves at risk, day after day, in service to others and to our nation. let me also thank the many other essential workers across the country who have helped meet our basic needs for goods and services in these difficult times. the virus and the forceful measures taken to control its spread have induced a sharp decline in economic activity and a surge in job losses. indicators of spending and production plummeted in april, and the decline in real gdp in the current quarter is likely to be the most severe on record. even after the unexpectedly positive may employment report, nearly 20 million jobs have been lost on net since february, and the unemployment rate has risen about 10 percentage points, to 13.3 percent. as was highlighted by the bureau of labor statistics, this figure likely understates the extent of unemployment; accounting for the unusually large number of workers who reported themselves as employed but absent from their jobs would raise the unemployment rate by about 3 percentage points. the downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the most affected. in  particular, the rise in joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers, for women, and for african americans and hispanics. in recent weeks, some indicators suggest a stabilization or even a modest rebound in some segments of the economy, such as retail merchandise and motor vehicle sales. employment rose in many sectors of the economy in may, and the unemployment [rate] edged down as some workers returned to their jobs from temporary layoffs. with the easing of social- distancing restrictions across the country, people are increasingly moving about, and many businesses are resuming operations to varying degrees. at the same time, many households have been receiving stimulus payments and unemployment benefits, which are supporting incomes and spending. activity in many parts of the economy has yet to pick up, however, and overall output is far below earlier levels. moreover, despite the improvements seen in the may jobs report, unemployment remains historically high. weak demand, especially in sectors most affected by the pandemic, is holding down consumer prices. as a result, inflation has fallen well below our symmetric 2 percent objective. indicators of longer-term inflation expectations have been fairly steady. the extent of the downturn and the pace of recovery remain extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on our success in containing the virus. we all want to get back to normal, but a full recovery is unlikely to occur until people are confident that it is safe to reengage in a broad range of activities. the severity of the downturn will also depend on the policy actions taken at all levels of government to provide relief and to support the recovery when the public health crisis passes. the fed’s response is guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of  the financial system. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time. in march, we quickly lowered our policy interest rate to near zero, where we expect to keep it until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. we have also been taking broad and forceful actions to support the flow of credit in the economy. without access to credit, families could be forced to cut back on necessities or even lose their homes. businesses could be forced to downsize or close, resulting in further losses of jobs and incomes and worsening the downturn. preserving the flow of credit is thus essential for mitigating the damage to the economy and setting the stage for the recovery. since march, we have been purchasing sizable quantities of treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities in order to support the smooth functioning of these markets, which are vital to the flow of credit in the economy. our ongoing purchases have helped to restore orderly market conditions and have fostered more accommodative financial conditions. as market functioning has improved since the strains experienced in march, we have gradually reduced the pace of these purchases. to sustain smooth market functioning and thereby foster the effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions, we will increase our holdings of treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities over coming months at least at the current pace. we will closely monitor developments and are prepared to adjust our plans as appropriate to support our goals. the federal reserve is also undertaking programs to provide stability to the financial system and to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy—for households, for businesses of all sizes, and for state and local governments. these programs benefit the economy by providing financing where it is not otherwise available. in addition, by serving as a  backstop to key credit markets, the programs can increase the willingness of private lenders to extend credit. many of these programs rely on emergency lending powers that are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as these—those we find ourselves in today. we are deploying these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from congress and from the treasury. we will continue to use these powers forcefully, proactively, and aggressively until we’re confident that we are solidly on the road to recovery. when the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the toolbox. i would stress that these are lending powers, not spending powers. the fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. we can only create programs or facilities with broad-based eligibility to make loans to solvent entity—entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. many borrowers will benefit from these programs, as will the overall economy. but for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. in these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. the cares act and other legislation provide direct help to people and businesses and communities. this direct support can make a critical difference not just in helping families and businesses in a time of need, but also in limiting long-lasting damage to our economy. at this meeting, my colleagues and i continued our discussion of approaches for conducting monetary policy when the federal funds rate is at its lower bound. the measures we discussed included explicit forms of forward guidance and asset purchases. we used these tools in the aftermath of the global financial crisis, and they have become a standard part of our toolkit. we also reviewed the historical and foreign experience with targeting interest rates  along the yield curve. whether such an approach would usefully complement our main tools remains an open question. we will continue our discussions in upcoming meetings and will evaluate our monetary policy stance and communications as more information about the trajectory of the economy becomes available. we also resumed our regular quarterly summary of economic projections, or the sep. the sep is an input into our deliberations, not an outcome, and it does not represent a committee view. rather, fomc participants write down their individual views of the most likely path for the economy, conditioned on each participant’s view of appropriate monetary policy. we tabulate those submissions, and we publish them as the sep. given the unusually high level of uncertainty about the outlook, many participants noted that they see a number of reasonably likely paths for the economy, and that it’s not possible to identify with confidence a single path as the “most likely” one. nonetheless, we believe that regular publication of the sep provides a useful perspective on the way fomc participants are assessing the path ahead. what the june sep shows is a general expectation of an economic recovery beginning in the second half of this year and lasting over the next couple of years, supported by interest rates that remain at their current level, near zero. of course, my colleagues and i will continue to base our policy decisions on the full range of plausible outcomes and not on a particular forecast. the risk-management approach—this risk-management approach is the best way we can promote our maximum-employment and price-stability goals in these unusually uncertain circumstances. finally, i want to acknowledge the tragic events that have again put a spotlight on the pain of racial injustice in this country. the federal reserve serves the entire nation. we operate in, and are part of, many of the communities across the country where americans are grappling with and expressing themselves on issues of racial equality. i speak for my colleagues  throughout the federal reserve system when i say that there is no place at the federal reserve for racism and there should be no place for it in our society. everyone deserves the opportunity to participate fully in our society and in our economy. these principles guide us in all we do, from monetary policy to our focus on diversity and inclusion in our workplace and to our work to ensure fair access to credit across the country. we will take this opportunity to renew our steadfast commitment to these principles. we understand that the work of the fed touches communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. thank you. i look forward to our questions. michelle smith. for the first question, nick timiraos. nick timiraos. yes, hi. thanks, chair powell. nick timiraos at the wall street journal. i want to ask about the economic projections, and i realize these are more of an educated guess at this point, but they suggest the committee sees quite a large output gap over the next two years. and yet the committee did not take any steps to date to—to reinforce your forward guidance. and so my questions are, first, what are you hoping to learn by waiting? second, how might that change your response? and, third, how close is the committee to reaching a decision on a—a more concrete forward guidance and whether yield caps might reinforce that guidance? chair powell. so, first, i would say that we think that monetary policy today is currently well positioned to support the economy in this challenging time. if we didn’t think that, of course, we would change our policy now. as you know, we—we lowered our policy rate  very quickly, [more] quickly than others, to the effective lower bound. and we’ve said that we’ll keep it there until the economy has weathered the effects of the virus and is on track to achieve our goals. you can see that in—in the dot plot, as i think you pointed out, that overwhelmingly, fomc participants expect, as their baseline expectation, no rate increase at least through 2022. and if you look at surveys of more forecasters and market participants, financial market prices, et cetera, those also appropriately reflect a long spell with rates at the effective lower bound. so the first thing is, monetary policy is in a good place, and it’s—that’s well understood in the markets. secondly, we’ve also taken strong measures to support the flow of credit in the economy, as i mentioned. and, third, we’re continuing asset prices in coming months at—at a— at a relatively high level. 1 so for all those reasons, we feel like policy is now in a good place. so as we look ahead, we see that the path for the—ahead for the economy is highly uncertain and continues to depend to a really significant degree on the path of the pandemic. so, at this meeting, what we did was, as i mentioned, we—we looked in some depth at forward guidance and asset purchases and looked carefully at those. we also received a briefing on the historical experience with yield curve control. and we’ll continue those discussions in upcoming meetings and evaluate our stance and communications as more and portion—more— more information about the trajectory of the economy becomes available. i—i would just say, in terms of—of what we’re looking for, we—we expect to get a better understanding of the economy’s trajectory and, particularly, how we should best deploy those tools to achieve those goals. so that’s really what we’re looking to achieve, and, as you can see, we’re—we’re actively at work on that. 1 chair powell intended to say “asset purchases” rather than “asset prices.”  michelle smith. okay. next, jeanna. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thank you so much for taking our questions. i’m—i’m curious about your inflation forecasts, which are—are pretty low across the forecast horizon. i guess just given how low you see inflation being over the coming years, why is policy appropriate now, and why not just kind of throw everything you can—you know, everything and the kitchen sink at it currently? and i guess if you could just talk a little bit about what urgency you see in—in returning it back to that 2 percent target. chair powell. our current policy stance is appropriate. and remember, we’re using—we’re using our—our emergency 13(3) lending tools to an unprecedented extent. we have asset purchases, and we’ve now said that we won’t go any lower than this, and—but—but that we’re prepared to adjust as appropriate, and rates are at the effective lower bound. so we have all of our tools in—in use in a strong way. and so what we’re—what we’re waiting for is to—is to learn more. i—i think, actually, if you look at the may employment report, it’s a pretty good—probably the biggest data surprise that anybody can remember. it’s a pretty good illustration of just how uncertain these times are. the economy is reopening. we’re going to learn a whole lot about the—the path of the economy in the next—in coming months. so that’s really what we’re—what we’re looking for. in terms of inflation, you’ll know that we—we had a 128-month expansion, and we never did quite get inflation back to 2 percent on a symmetric, sustained basis. we got close for the last couple of years, but we never did quite get there. so i think we have to be humble about our ability to move inflation up and particularly when unemployment is—is going to be above most estimates of the natural rate for—certainly above the median in our—in our—in our sep well through the end of—past the end of 2022. so i do—i think we’re in the right place now. we—  we are looking carefully at what the—as we learn more and—and better understand the—the path of the economy, we will be assessing, what’s the best way to deploy all of our tools to achieve our goals in the best possible way? and i’ll—i’ll just say again that we are—the—the may employment report, of course, was a—was a welcome surprise, very pleased. we hope we get many more like it. but i think we have to be honest. it’s a—it’s a long road. it’s—it’s, depending on how you count it, well more than 20 million people displaced in the labor market. it’s going to take some time. and we are going to be deploying our tools—all of our tools, to their full extent, in pursuit of that—of those goals, however long it takes. michelle smith. okay. steve liesman. steve liesman. thank you, mr. chairman. i think i understand how the fed might react in the event things come out worse than expected. i think i don’t understand how you might react if things come out better than expected—kind of a variant on these other questions. how firm is the commitment to lower interest rates? and if things end up better, do you stick with these low interest rates, as you—as you projected them? and—or is it specific points that you have in mind—for example, unemployment or inflation—that is animating where you might go? and what are those numbers that you’re looking for that might cause you to change about the policy as it now is projected? chair powell. i would start with—that’s where i would start. i would say, you know, we were—we just had a period of unemployment, as you know, that was in the—well below 4 percent, hanging around 3½ percent, that lasted two years. and during that period of time, we saw a lot of great things happening in the labor market, things that we’d love to get back to. we didn’t see any problems with price inflation. price inflation didn’t really react  much. so, i would say, you know, we’d be looking to get inflation back up, and we—we’d be prepared to tolerate pretty low—welcome, in fact, not tolerate but welcome very low readings on—on unemployment just based on what we—what we saw in the last—in the last expansion. so, you know, we’re—we’re not thinking about raising rates. we’re not even thinking about thinking about raising rates. so what we’re thinking about is—is providing support for this economy. we do think this is going to take some time. i think most forecasters believe that. it would be great if—if we got a whole bunch more months of job creation like that. not— notwithstanding that, as i mentioned, there are—there are just a lot of people that are unemployed. and it seems quite likely that there will be a significant group at the end of— even—even after a lot of strong job growth, that’ll still be struggling to find jobs, and we’ll still be providing strong accommodation for that. michelle smith. okay, thank you. james. james politi. thanks very much, chair powell. there have been plenty of comparisons with the great depression of the 1930s since the crisis began. i mean, is that scenario sort of got[ten] more dire as data comes out and we’re looking at a more traditional and sudden recession? and are you at all concerned that the performance—the strong performance in the stock market in the last few weeks is disconnected from economic reality? chair powell. i don’t think that the—that the great depression is a good example or a likely outcome or a model for what’s happening here at all. i really don’t. and there—there are just so many fundamental differences. first, the government response has been so fast and so forceful. the origin was quite different. this was a very—an economy that was in a healthy place. of course, every economy has longer-run challenges, not—and that—that includes our economy, notwithstanding that 50-year low in unemployment and the longest expansion in our  history and every reason to think it could continue. so that’s different from what was happening around the time of the great—the depression started. the financial system this time was in— was in—was in very good shape, much better capitalized. so, you know, it’s just not the right model. i would say, we’re learning. you know, every month that passes, we’re seeing more, we’re learning more. and i think particularly the next few months will be very important in learning what the—what the real story will be, because we’ll see the—the significant incoming data about the opening of the economy—the reopening of the economy. you know—and i would say, assuming that the—that the—that the disease remains or becomes pretty much under control, i think that what you see is a—is a very weak second quarter, historically weak, and then an—an expansion that builds momentum over time. people will adjust, probably a little bit gradually, to some of the activities that would— that involve getting together in small—in large groups in close quarters. those will be the harder parts of the economy to recover. but, ultimately, we do see a full recovery over time. and that’s really what, you know, what i think i’m—i’m personally seeing. and you could see significant job growth in—in coming months as people return to their jobs, but you’re still going to face probably an extended period where it will be difficult for many people to find work. and for—and that’s what you see in—in—in, really, many, many forecasts at this point. that doesn’t mean it’s right, but that’s sort of a—a broad expectation, certainly not the depression forecast. michelle smith. thank you. chris from the associated press. christopher rugaber. hi. thank you for taking our questions. well, in the projections you have—you didn’t change the—the fed policymakers didn’t change their—the forecast for long-run unemployment, so that suggests that you—you know, the—that all of you  so far don’t see necessarily prospects for long-term damage. but still, what kind of data are you looking at here to gauge, you know, the potential for longer-term hits to the economy even as we have some of these—even as we have something like the may jobs report, you could still have, at the same time, people return from temporary layoffs, there could still be permanent job losses? so what kind of data are you looking at to gauge that potential impact, and what is—what is it telling us so far? chair powell. chris, this is a really important risk. and i think it’s—it’s not the risk for the next few months, but it’s the risk over time of—of lasting damage to the—to these— you know, to the productive capacity of the united states, typically in two forms. one, through extended periods of unemployment, people lose contact with the labor force. they get out of touch with the skills and—that they need, and—and they have a hard time getting back in, and that drives that—that, you know, it’s very damaging to people’s lives and their working lives. and it also just lowers, in a way—it can—it can increase the—you know, the unemployment rate, but it can also lower the labor force participation rate, which is almost worse, in a way, to have people dropping out of the labor force where we need them in the—in the labor force working. the other piece of it is just businesses. you know, a shock like this that just comes in, it’s like a natural disaster. you wouldn’t want a lot of perfectly good businesses, particularly the smaller and medium-sized businesses that may not have a lot of resources to sustain them to— you know, to go out of business permanently in a situation like that—like this where, really, there was no reason for it. of course, you know, businesses are going to go in and out. they’re going to fail all the time, and that’s a healthy thing in capitalism. that’s something that has to  happen. but this is different. this is a way—potentially—so those are the things we’ve been worried about. we didn’t change. you—you’re right, though. we didn’t change our longer-run estimate of—of potential growth or of the unemployment rate. and that’s—i would say, in my thinking, the reason i didn’t change mine is that i still—i—i think we can avoid that or avoid much of that, most of that even. and—and we do that with measures that—that, you know, keep people in their homes; that—that support hiring; that support growth; that avoid unnecessary, avoidable business insolvencies. and that’s all the things that we’re trying to do. basically, if you look at what’s happened, as i mentioned, there’s something—somewhere short of 25 million people have been displaced, even after the good may employment report. what we’re trying to do is create an environment in which they have the best chance either to go back to their old job or to get a new job. that’s—that’s kind of the most important part of this exercise. and maybe these—it’s probably hopeful at this point to say that—that we won’t have longer-run damage to the economy, and these numbers won’t change. so—but i think it’s way too early to be—to be changing the longer run—see, these are—these are not meant to be short- run numbers. they’re called—they’re longer-run assessments, so i—i would—i have not changed mine, and i’m hopeful that—that i won’t have to change it. michelle smith. heather long. heather long. hi. good afternoon, chair powell. i’m struggling with two things that i hope you can provide some clarity on. the first is the ongoing bond buying program. you say that it’s needed to continue the smooth functioning of markets, but i guess most of us aren’t really seeing a lot of instability in markets right now. so if you could kind of give us some clarity of what you’re seeing that needs to continue to be smooth at that level and that pace.  second is, you know, you were just talking about fed concerns about small and medium-sized companies going out of business during this. and, i guess, you know, the main street lending program still isn’t running yet. when do you expect loans to start happening? and do you think the two-month delay has—has hurt the chances of some companies surviving? chair powell. there have been gains in market function, although not fully back to where you would say they were, for example, in—in february, before the pandemic arrived. we don’t take those gains for granted, though. this is a—this is a highly fluid situation, and we’re— we’re not taking those for granted. and, in addition, as i pointed out in my—in my statement, those purchases are clearly also supporting highly accommodative—or accommodative financial conditions, and that’s—that’s a good thing, so that’s why we’re doing that. turning quickly to main street, so i would say that the thing—what we’ve done on main street, i think to a greater degree, is, we’ve listened to feedback. so we’ve been out repeatedly for feedback in trying to create a—a much more difficult product than, really, the other facilities. and i think this—this last set of changes we made have actually been very positive for the facility. i think it’s going to be better able to achieve its goals, and, you know, so we’ve used the time well, i think. and that—we are now in the—in the—in the final run-up to starting the facility. what we did, as you saw earlier—i guess it’s early this week or late, whenever we did it in the last few days—was we lowered the minimum loan size and we increased the maximum loan size. but, i think, even more importantly, we lengthened the maturity and we stretched out the repayment schedule significantly. so borrowers will get a—a two-year delay until they have to make any principal payments—repayments and a one-year delay on interest. so we had been hearing from  both borrowers and lenders that these would be very helpful. we made the changes. we’re putting them through the facility. the next step will be to register lenders. at that time, loans can begin to be made. shortly after that, the facility itself will be up, and those facilities can be—those loans can be sold—95 percent of the loans. and it’s 95 percent across the board now in the main street facility can be sold. so all of that should happen quickly now. and i do think this has—this has been a challenging project, but i think we’ve come to a—to a better place. and, by the way, we’re—we’re going to be prepared to adapt further, if we need to. and—and that’s true of all of our facilities. these are unique. there’s no—there’s no playbook here. you—you have to draw this up and then try it out. and we’ve—we’ve been, you know, very willing to adapt and will continue to be. michelle smith. okay, matt from bloomberg. matthew boesler. hello, chair powell. this is matthew boesler with bloomberg news. i wanted to ask you about regulatory forbearance. there were some piecemeal forbearance measures put into place in various jurisdictions and also to a slice of the mortgage market to prevent banks from foreclosing on such debts amid the widespread financial hardships caused by the pandemic. and with many of those set to expire soon and many businesses and households still in dire financial straits, i’m wondering if any consideration is being given at the fed to more comprehensive regulatory forbearance measures or other regulatory measures to prevent businesses from going under just because they can’t meet those payments. there have, of course, been some tweaks to the paycheck protection program on the fiscal side to address this, but i wanted to ask you about things you might be able to do on the regulatory side as well. thank you.  chair powell. we can—we can make changes to bank regulation and supervision. i don’t know that we have the ability to make changes, for example, in mortgage payments, if that’s what you’re thinking of, or credit card payments. that’s really—that’s something that could be legislative, or it could just be what the—what the banks themselves are doing. there’s been a tremendous amount of forbearance on the part of the banks, and i guess our role there would be to encourage it, but those are not decisions that we hold any legal authority to make, and we—by the way, we have encouraged those decisions. i hope that’s responsive to your question. michelle smith. okay. scott horsley, npr. scott horsley. thank you, mr. chairman. i know you’re loathe to weigh in too heavily on fiscal policy, but given your forecast for elevated unemployment rates, do you think it’s important that congress extend the $600 a week extra unemployment benefits? chair powell. i think we try to keep our comments on fiscal policy at a high level, and i’ll—i’ll come to your specific question, but i would just say this: this is the biggest economic shock in the u.s. and in the world, really, in living memory. we went from the lowest level of employ—unemployment in 50 years to the highest level in close to 90 years, and we did it in two months. extraordinary. and, appropriately, the response from fiscal authorities has been large, forceful, and very quick by—by the standards of these things. roughly $3 trillion congress has authorized, and that’s benefiting households; laid-off workers; small, medium, and large businesses; hospitals; state and local governments—14 percent of gdp. it is—it’s in a class by itself, in terms of both the size and the speed of it, and it’s also pretty innovative. you know, the—both the ppp and the unemployment insurance are quite innovative in the american context, and there were difficulties in implementing it, but that’s really a function  of—of their novelty, i think. those programs—by the way, let me add: the fed also—we both innovated and acted forcefully, progressively, proactively, and aggressively as well. if you put those together, all of that is making a difference now. you look at the income data. the expanded unemployment insurance and also the stimulus checks have gone a long way to replacing lost income from—from job loss. i think you’re seeing it in the job market data. many are giving the ppp credit on that front and—and in keeping small businesses going. so it’s—so far, it’s a good response, and it’s having—it’s having a big effect. you—you get to—the question is, it’s big—everyone can see that it’s big. is it going to be big enough? and that—that is the question. and—and the question for—for—the question that i’ve been concerned about, really, is this issue of longer-run damage to the economy. we’re—we’re—we’re doing a fair job of getting through these first few months, more than a fair job. the question, though, is, that group of people who won’t be able to go back to work quickly, what about them? and that could be many millions of people, you know, parts— who worked in parts of the economy that will be the slow ones to recover. and, you know, we want those people back in the labor force. we want them getting jobs. so—and—and they’re going to need possibly—probably will need further support. so i will just say this: it’s possible that we will need to do more, and it’s possible that congress will need to do more. in terms of the $600 unemployment insurance, i wouldn’t—i wouldn’t try to give congress advice on the specifics of that. i—i know they’re looking at—i mean, i—i know from both talking to people and—and reading the papers that they’re looking at a whole bunch of different possible approaches going forward, and some of those seem kind of promising. so, you know, we’re happy to give advice if people ask for it but—but probably not—not publicly. michelle smith. thank you. david gura.  david gura. thank you, chair powell. i’m going to pick up on what scott horsley was asking just a moment ago. you have been studious about threading this needle in the interviews that you’ve given and speeches and the—the colloquy that’s followed, not giving advice to congress but indicating that there’s likely to be a need for more fiscal stimulus or additional policy in the future. so i’m going to try a hypothetical here, and you can rebuff it if— if you want. but if you were to find yourself in a—in a senator’s office suite, and he held up that may unemployment report, which you’ve described as unexpectedly positive and—and a welcome surprise, and if he or she said to you, “look, this is an indication that we can put on the breaks,” i wonder what you would say. your—your message throughout this crisis has been one of how unprecedented it is, about how much urgency there is in dealing with this. indeed, we’ve seen that from the federal reserve. i wonder if you worry that that sense of urgency isn’t being matched and—and what the consequences of that might be, if there’s a fear that the fed could be seen as a cassandra here as we look at that unemployment report and then through the summer, and you have more and more politicians inclined just to wait and see what happens here in—in subsequent reports. and a quick second question, if i could. you’ve talked a lot about your fear of a second wave of this disease, and it strikes me, there’s a—a difficulty here with definition. you’ve talked about us weathering this crisis and getting through this storm. it seems to me, as i listen to the chatter coming from the white house and from politicians and epidemiologists, there isn’t agreement on what “getting through this” means. and you have an administration now inclined to, if not direct, be content with states opening up their economies perhaps too early. how  problematic is that from a policy perspective, not having agreement on what it means to have defeated this virus or gotten to a place where the economy can get through this? chair powell. i can’t offer any advice, but i will provide a little context for the— for—i want to be clear about the picture—one way to look at the picture, really, and that is this: you can—you can get at this by looking at, you know, the—the—the widest measure of unemployment, of labor market slack, if you will, is the u-6 measure. and the u—that’s the— the one we look—talk about all the time is called u-3, by economists. and the—the one that has a much broader measurement of slack in the economy is u-6. so in—in—in u-6, the u-6 level of unemployment has tripled from 7 percent to 21 percent. that—that amounts to 22 million additional people who are—who’ve—who’ve lost work in the economy either by going to part time or something like that. so that’s in the low 20s, and that’s post the may employment report. you can get at it a different way. you can look at—at just the regular unemployment rate. you can take the 21 [million]—people who have—had—are listed as unemployed right now. you can add more on for the ones who were miscoded. you can also take those people who are suddenly out of the labor force. you put those together, and that has gone up by about 24 million. so those are two different measures of what’s happened. so the question is, 20, 22, 24 million people—got to get them back to work. somehow, we’ve got to all, as a country, get those people back to work. they didn’t do anything wrong; this was a natural disaster, and i—i really—i do think the responses so far have been great. so that’s the way i would think about it. and if—if you think we—i would just, in terms of the may employment report, it’s—it’s so nice to see. i mean, i think what people were thinking was that you’d start to get those back- to-work kind of numbers in june and july and august. very few people saw them in may. i mean, almost no one saw that happening as early as mid-may, but it did. and so, you know, and  we—we don’t know fully what that means, whether it’s just a timing change or whether it will prove to be much more than that. we’ll—we’re going to have to wait and see. it is a—as i mentioned earlier, it is clear evidence of just how uncertain things are, and—and how humble we have to be about our ability to—to really have confident predictions as opposed to just predictions. so, bottom line, i would just say, that—that—the key thing people need to understand is that there’s just a lot of work to do in the labor market. we’re going to stick with this and support that until the work is done. that you—you can—that is something we’re going to do with all of our tools, and i think it may require congress to help as well. it may, but that’s going to be their decision. on—you also asked about the second wave. so we—you know, we have major responsibilities and powerful tools, but the decision about when to reopen the economy is one for elected officials at the state and local and federal level. and, you know, if they ask, we—we don’t have any particular expertise here at the fed in pandemics or coronaviruses or anything like that. we talk to experts, but—you know, so we don’t have anything special to add on that. i would just say, it’s—you know, it’s kind of self evident, i think, that if a—if it happens, you know, the—the issue would be, first of all, people’s health, but secondly, you could see a public loss of confidence in—in parts of the economy that will be already slow to recover. so it could hurt the recovery even if you don’t have a national-level pandemic, just a—just a series of—of local ones, of local spikes could—could have the effect of undermining people’s confidence in traveling, in restaurants and entertainment, anything that involves getting people together in small groups and feeding them or flying them around—those things could be hurt. so it would not be a positive development, and i’ll just leave it at that.  michelle smith. thank you. edward lawrence. edward lawrence. thank you, chairman powell, for the question. on main street lending facilities, you know, in may we saw 55—at least 55 companies file for bankruptcy. do you think that it is too late, first of all? second of all, the future of these facilities—is this a one-year impact to the economy through these facilities, or is this a multiple-year? if so, how many years? chair powell. we have, you know, significant interest, we think. and also, remember, lots and lots of companies are getting financed, too. the—the banks are lending. the markets are open. you know, you have a—a—a much better lending climate than—than certainly than we had in february and march. we don’t think it’s too late, though. we—we— and we do expect it to be up quite soon. in terms of the timing of these things, so, you know, we’ll leave them open as—we’ll leave them open for new loans as long as they need to. that’ll be a decision we make, of course, with our colleagues at the treasury department. and, at a certain point, there won’t be a need for further loans, and—and then the assets will—will be there. and so if that’s—i don’t know if that’s a part of your question too, but i would just say that, at that point, you know, the—the useful role of the—of the federal reserve is probably close to an end at that point. we don’t have any expertise in managing pools of credit assets, loans—if you will—or bonds, and we, you know, we don’t want to be made—we don’t really want to be part of the decisions that have to be made to manage such a portfolio, so we’d be looking to have that done either someplace else or, you know, by—by a third party or at the treasury department or something. and we’re, you know, we’re working on ideas for that. but our real focus now is  on—is getting these facilities going and—and getting them to do the job that they—they need to do. michelle smith. thank you. jonelle with reuters. jonelle marte. thank you, chair. so i have two quick questions. one is if we have hit bottom for the economy, and the second question is regarding the—the way that the pandemic has exacerbated racial inequality. i wanted to ask, to what extent do you think you can factor in both disparities when you’re thinking about maximum employment? chair powell. i would say that many forecasters had been expecting a bottom for the economy in—around the middle of the year, with—with a huge range of uncertainty. i think the labor market—the evidence of one jobs report is that the labor market may have hit bottom in may. we don’t know that; we’re going to see. and, you know, many forecasters widely expect a—a recovery over the second half of the year. so it—it is possible, but the thing is, we’re not going to overreact to a single data point. we’re going to be very careful about reaching any conclusions about—about good data or bad data. so, i think, you know, we’re going to be here with our tools supporting this economy for as long as it’s needed. so—but i think there’s a possibility that—that the bottom has come in the labor market, but we don’t know that yet. we’ll—we’ll know more as we go forward. so, in terms of the—you know, the effect of the pandemic on inequality, what you see— the pandemic, of course, hits everybody, but in an economic sense, it hits those industries that are—that involve groups of people in tight groups, either in places where they’re—it’s the travel, leisure, restaurant, bars, those kinds of service-economy jobs. and so a lot of the lost jobs were from people who work in the service economy, dealing with the public, for example, and relatively—compared to other jobs, relatively low wages. so, and if—if you just look at what  that is, unemployment has gone up more for hispanics, more for african americans. and women have borne—borne an extraordinary—a notable share of the burden beyond their percentage in the workforce. so that’s really—really, really unfortunate, because if you just go back two months, where we were was, we had, effectively, the first tight labor market in a quarter-century. and for the last couple of years before the pandemic hit, you were seeing wages go up the most for people at the lower end of the wage spectrum, and that was great. and, you know, we were meeting with people from low- and—low- and moderate-income communities all over the country and hearing, “don’t change this. do whatever you—do whatever you can. keep this going. this is the best labor market we’ve seen.” and we had every expect—every expectation, every reason to expect that this would continue, and then this comes. so it’s—it’s heartbreaking, and, you know, we want to get it back, so—we really want to get it back. and so i think we learned a number of things over the course of the last few years. one of them is that, you know, i—you—you can have 3, 3½ percent unemployment for a couple of years, and, really, you see modest moves in wages and relatively almost invisible moves in inflation. so that was not anybody’s understanding of the structure of the economy, i think, or most peoples’, anyway. so we can use our tools to—to support the labor market and support the economy. we can—we can use them until we do fully recover, and that—that’s what we’re planning to do. you know, we don’t target different groups. what—what we are—we are cognizant of the fact, though, that late in the last cycle, late in the last expansion, the benefits really do go more to people at the lower end of the wage spectrum for—for the first time in many years when labor  markets are tight, when unemployment is low. and so we would really like to get back to that— get back to that place. michelle smith. victoria from politico. victoria guida. hi, i’m victoria guida with politico. i just wanted to follow up on a couple of things that are—have already been asked. first of all, on fiscal policy, you all obviously put out your summary of economic projections today, and i’m curious to what extent future fiscal policy is factored in or not factored in to those projections, and—and how, more or less, fiscal policy might affect those projections. and then my other question is on—on main street. you’ve mentioned multiple times that, you know, the fed and treasury are willing to expand the program further. so my question is, what’s the threshold for those types of changes? is it just making sure that borrowers that want to borrow through the program are—are—are able to do that? chair powell. in terms of the way—the way we do forecasts is, we—we don’t— the—we don’t tend to incorporate things we’re highly uncertain about. so i think the—the forecast would not have included substantial additional—you know, big additional fiscal support for the economy. maybe—maybe a modest amount, something that looks like a—a low-end guess on what might come out of the current negotiations. that’s basically what would be in the baseline. so, of course, if there were more fiscal support, you’d see—you’d see better results sooner, but that’s a question for congress. you know, we’re—we’re spending a lot, and that’s really what they get to decide. in terms of main street and our willingness to expand it further, i think we’re—one thing we’re looking at—very strongly looking at is—is nonprofits, and is there a way to—to incorporate them into—into that facility or a similar facility. so that’s another dimension. i—  you know, if we had a great idea for changing main street, we would’ve done it. and we—and we have done some things that i think are really very positive lately here. but if we—as we learn more, it could be—it could be in terms of size, it could be in terms of lots of different things. but i—i think we have a good product to go to market with now, and i think it’ll get— it’ll get out there soon. and, you know, we’ll see, and—and we’ll be willing to continue to adapt. michelle smith. thank you. don lee. don lee. chair powell, as you know, the vast majority of people who have been laid off are expecting to be recalled by their employers. at this point, what is your expectation of how much of these job losses will be permanent? chair powell. i don’t have a reliable estimate of that. clearly, not everyone will go back. but—and i—i would say, many will go back, but what’s—what’s going to be the remainder when—you know, when we reach sort of what is the new normal? it’s—it’s so uncertain, but it—it could be a good number of millions of people, i think, in many—in many estimates, but these—i’d say you’re so early in the process. people are—for example, people are going back and looking at other significant changes in the economy, and they’ve seen how many people go back when, for example, there’s a technological change, and things like that—you may have seen some of this research—and you come up with an estimate. i—you know, it’s just going to be very hard to say. i—i, but i—my—my assumption is that there will be a significant chunk—chunk well into the millions. i—i don’t want to give you a number, because it’s going to be a guess, but well, well into the millions of people who—who don’t get to go back to their old job. and, in fact, there isn’t a—there may not be a job in that industry for them for some time. there will  eventually be, but it could be some years before we get back to those people finding jobs. i mean, when—when people lose a job, if they can find a job in their own industry, that’s usually the fastest way, is—is they know other people in that industry, different kinds of jobs. that’s usually the fastest. if you have to go to a different industry and start over again, it’s much harder, and that’s where you start to lose people’s—who are—just fall out of the labor force. and—and, you know, it’s very tough on their lives. we all know people who—to whom that happened in the global financial crisis, and, hence, our desire to—to do what we can to support this and—and—and support this recovery with—with the tools that we have. michelle smith. thank you. nancy marshall-genzer. nancy marshall-genzer. nancy marshall-genzer, marketplace. chair powell, i’m wondering—i want to go back to the issue of inequality, and i’m wondering, what more could the fed do to reduce economic inequality in this country? i mean, i know that you said you don’t target certain groups, but is there a way that you could use, for example, the black unemployment rate as—as some kind of a benchmark to something you’d want to meet or something that you’d keep track of? chair powell. we do. we do track all unemployment by all kinds, as you know— all kinds of different demographics, including particularly the african american unemployment rate, which reached an all-time low since the data started being kept in the modern era. of course, it’s still close to twice the white unemployment—it is twice the unemployment rate, or it was back in the—back then. it’s certainly much higher now. you know, the—the best thing we can do with our monetary policy tools is to—is to look at, you know, the evidence of what we saw—that we saw with our own eyes so recently, which is that the economy can have very low unemployment—very low unemployment. it could’ve  been lower than we were. it could be lower than 3½ percent without seeing financial imbalances, without seeing inflation going—getting out of control. we, frankly, didn’t even get inflation back up to target—without seeing wages getting out of touch with—with where they should be, so that’s the—that’s the biggest thing we can do. you know, in—in—inequality is something that’s been with us increasingly for more than four decades, and it’s—it’s not really related to monetary policy. it’s, or—or it’s more related to—there are a lot of theories on—on what causes it, but it’s been something that’s more or less been going up consistently for more than four decades. and there are a lot of different theories, one of which is—just is that it—globalization—globalization and technology call for rising levels of skills and aptitudes and education, and that u.s. educational attainment kind of flattened out, certainly relative to our peers—flattened out over that period. and so a lot—so that means if you’re—if you’re on the right side of those trends, then those things are good for you. if you’re not, then your wages are going to stagnate. and wages for the bottom, you know, 10 percent really haven’t gone up in real terms in a very long time, and—over a long period of time, whereas wages for the people at the top, compensation, any way you cut it—before taxes, after taxes, after transfers, all of those, any way you cut it—wages have—compensation has gone up a whole lot for people at the top, and it really hasn’t gone up for people at the bottom. if you look more in the middle, then it’s—then—then it has gone up for most other groups, but at the bottom, not so much in real terms, in inflation-adjusted terms. so, you know, we—we call it out as a—as an important factor in the economy, and we will use our tools to support maximum employment and take that, you know, definition to heart. but, obviously, that’s something that’s going to require an all-of-society, all-of-government response.  michelle smith. thank you. for the last question, we’ll go to michael mckee with bloomberg tv. michael mckee. mr. chairman, michael mckee, bloomberg television and radio. i came across a statistic the other day that amazed me. since your march 23 emergency announcement, every single stock in the s&p 500 has delivered a positive return. and i’m wondering, given the levels of the market right now, whether you or your colleagues feel there is a possible bubble blowing that could pop and set back the recovery significantly, or that we might see capital misallocation that will leave us worse off when this is over. second, inequality is not just about wages, it’s also about wealth. and a number of studies have suggested that by keeping rates low for so long and targeting the markets after the great financial crisis, that the fed did contribute to wealth inequality in this country. and i’m wondering if you think there is some tweak or some message you could give that would affect that. chair powell. what we’ve targeted is broader financial conditions. if you go back to the end of february and early march, you had—basically, the world markets realized at just about the same time—i remember that monday—that there was going to be a global pandemic, and that this possibility that it would be contained in one province in china, for all practical purposes, was not going to happen. it all—it was—you know, it was iran, italy, korea, and then it became clear in markets. from that point forward, investors everywhere in the world, for a period of weeks, wanted to sell everything that wasn’t cash or a—a short-term treasury instrument. they didn’t want it to have any risk at all. and so what happened is, markets stopped working. they stopped working, and companies couldn’t—couldn’t borrow. they couldn’t roll over their debt. people couldn’t borrow. so that’s—that’s the kind of situation that  can be very—financial turbulence and malfunction—a financial system that’s not working can greatly amplify the negative effects of what was clearly going to be a major economic shock. so what our tools were—were put to work to do was to restore the markets to function. and i think, you know, some of that has really happened, as i—as i mentioned in my opening remarks, and that’s a good thing. so we—we’re not looking to achieve a particular level of any asset price. what we want is investors to be pricing in risk like markets are supposed to do. borrowers are borrowing. lenders are lending. we want the markets to be working. and, again, we’re not looking to—to a particular level. i think our—our principal focus, though, is on—on the state of the economy and on the labor market and on inflation. now, inflation, of course, is—is low, and we think it’s very likely to remain low for some time, below our target. so, really, it’s about getting the labor market back and getting it in shape. that’s—that’s been our major focus. and i would say, you know, we—if we were to hold back because—we would never do this, but—the idea that, just the concept that we would hold back because we think asset prices are too high—others may not think so, but we just decided that that’s the case—what would happen to those people? you know, what would happen to the people that we’re actually legally supposed to be serving? we’re supposed to be pursuing maximum employment and stable prices, and that’s what we’re pursuing. we’re also pursuing financial stability, but there you have a banking system that is so much better capitalized, so much stronger, better aware of its risks, better at managing its risks, more highly liquid. you have all of those things. and they’ve been lending. they’ve been taking in deposits. they’ve been a source of strength in this situation.  so i would say that, you know, we’re tightly focused on our real economy goals. and— and, again, not—we’re not—we’re not focused on moving asset prices in a particular direction at all. it’s just we want markets to be working, and i think, partly as a result of what we’ve done, they—they are working. and, you know, we hope that continues. thank you very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 3 attended through the discussion of economic developments and the outlook, and all of wednesday’s session. 4 attended through the discussion of forward guidance, asset purchases, and yield caps or targets. 1 page 2 federal open market committee  burcu duygan-bump, andrew figura, shane m. sherlund, and paul a. smith, deputy associate directors, division of research and statistics, board of governors; jeffrey d. walker,2 deputy associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board of governors; paul r. wood,4 deputy associate director, division of international finance, board of governors brian j. bonis, etienne gagnon, and zeynep senyuz, assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board of governors matthias paustian,4 assistant director and chief, division of research and statistics, board of governors penelope a. beattie,5 section chief, office of the secretary, board of governors; dana l. burnett, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board of governors; dario caldara,6 section chief, division of international finance, board of governors division of international finance, board of governors randall a. williams, senior information manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors james hebden4 and james m. trevino,4 senior technology analysts, division of monetary affairs, board of governors andre anderson, first vice president, federal reserve bank of atlanta david altig, joseph w. gruber, anna paulson, daleep singh, and christopher j. waller, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of atlanta, kansas city, chicago, new york, and st. louis, respectively edward s. knotek ii, paolo a. pesenti, julie ann remache,2 samuel schulhofer-wohl,2 robert g. valletta, and nathaniel wuerffel,2 senior vice presidents, federal reserve banks of cleveland, new york, new york, chicago, san francisco, and new york, respectively mark a. carlson, senior economic project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors; canlin li,4 senior economic project manager, division of international finance, board of governors roc armenter, matthew d. raskin,2 and patricia zobel, vice presidents, federal reserve banks of philadelphia, new york, and new york, respectively david h. small, project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors robert lerman,2 assistant vice president, federal reserve bank of new york hess t. chung,4 group manager, division of research and statistics, board of governors daniel cooper and john a. weinberg, senior economists and policy advisors, federal reserve banks of boston and richmond, respectively michele cavallo, bernd schlusche,4 and mary tian, principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board of governors; maria otoo, principal economist, division of research and statistics, board of governors sriya anbil,4 erin e. ferris, and fabian winkler, senior economists, division of monetary affairs, board of governors; david s. miller,4 senior economist, division of research and statistics, board of governors; gaston navarro, senior economist, attended through the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. 5 the chair opened the meeting with an acknowledgment of the extraordinary and deeply troubling events of the last two weeks. injustice, prejudice, and the callous disregard for life had led to social unrest and a sense of despair. the chair noted that it was incumbent upon the leaders of the federal reserve system to continue to communicate with force and clarity about the federal reserve’s core values, and to reaffirm its unflinching commitment to those values in pursuing the federal reserve’s mandated goals. in that spirit, the chair noted that he intended to offer the following remarks at the attended from the discussion of economic developments and the outlook through the end of tuesday’s session. 6 minutes of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 3  end of the postmeeting press conference. all participants supported the statement affirming the federal reserve’s core values and its commitment to do everything it can to foster racial equality as well as diversity and inclusion both within the federal reserve system and in society more broadly. i want to acknowledge the tragic events that have again put a spotlight on the pain of racial injustice in this country. the federal reserve serves the entire nation. we operate in, and are part of, many of the communities across the country where americans are grappling with and expressing themselves on issues of racial equality. i speak for my colleagues throughout the federal reserve system when i say that there is no place at the federal reserve for racism, and there should be no place for it in our society. everyone deserves the opportunity to participate fully in our society and in our economy. these foundational principles guide us in all we do, from monetary policy to our focus on diversity and inclusion in our workplace, and to our work regulating and supervising banks to ensure fair access to credit around the country. we will take this opportunity to renew our steadfast commitment to these principles, making sure that we are playing our part. we understand that the work of the federal reserve touches communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. discussion of forward guidance, asset purchases, and yield curve caps or targets participants discussed tools for conducting monetary policy when the federal funds rate is at its effective lower bound (elb). the discussion addressed two topics: (1) the roles of forward guidance and large-scale asset purchase programs in supporting the attainment of the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals and (2) in light of the foreign and historical experience with approaches that cap or target interest rates along the yield curve, whether such approaches could be used to support forward guidance and complement asset purchase programs. the staff briefing on the first topic focused on outcome-based forward guidance for the federal funds rate—which ties changes in the target range for the federal funds rate to the achievement of specified macroeconomic outcomes, such as reaching a given level of the unemployment rate or inflation—and asset purchase programs of the kind used during and following the previous recession. the staff presented results from model simulations that suggested that forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases can help support the labor market recovery and the return of inflation to the committee’s symmetric 2 percent inflation goal. the simulations suggested that the committee would have to maintain highly accommodative financial conditions for many years to quicken meaningfully the recovery from the current severe downturn. the briefing addressed factors that might alter the potency of forward guidance and asset purchase programs, along with a number of considerations for the design of these actions. the staff cautioned that businesses and households might not be as forward looking as assumed in the model simulations, which could reduce the effectiveness of policies that are predicated on influencing expectations about the path of policy several years into the future. alternatively, prompt and forceful policy actions by the committee might help focus the public’s expectations around better outcomes or reduce perceived risks of worst-case scenarios, which could generate more immediate macroeconomic benefits than those featured in the staff analysis. the second staff briefing reviewed the yield caps or targets (yct) policies that the federal reserve followed during and after world war ii and that the bank of japan and the reserve bank of australia are currently employing. these three experiences illustrated different types of yct policies: during world war ii, the federal reserve capped yields across the curve to keep treasury borrowing costs low and stable; since 2016, the bank of japan has targeted the 10-year yield to continue to provide accommodation while limiting the potential for an excessive flattening of the yield curve; and, since march 2020, the reserve bank of australia has targeted the three-year yield, a target that is intended to reinforce the bank’s forward guidance for its policy rate and to influence funding rates across much of the australian economy. the staff noted that these three experiences suggested that credible yct policies can control government bond yields, pass through to private rates, and, in the absence of exit considerations, may not require large central bank purchases of government debt. but the staff also highlighted the potential for yct policies to require the central bank to purchase very sizable page 4 federal open market committee  amounts of government debt under certain circumstances—a potential that was realized in the u.s. experience in the 1940s—and the possibility that, under yct policies, monetary policy goals might come in conflict with public debt management goals, which could pose risks to the independence of the central bank. in their discussion of forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, participants agreed that the committee has had extensive experience with these tools, that they were effective in the wake of the previous recession, that they have become key parts of the monetary policy toolkit, and that, as a result, they have important roles to play in supporting the attainment of the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. various participants noted that the economy is likely to need support from highly accommodative monetary policy for some time and that it will be important in coming months for the committee to provide greater clarity regarding the likely path of the federal funds rate and asset purchases. participants generally indicated support for outcome-based forward guidance. a number of participants spoke favorably of forward guidance tied to inflation outcomes that could possibly entail a modest temporary overshooting of the committee’s longer-run inflation goal but where inflation fluctuations would be centered on 2 percent over time. they saw this form of forward guidance as helping reinforce the credibility of the committee’s symmetric 2 percent inflation objective and potentially preventing a premature withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation. a couple of participants signaled a preference for forward guidance tied to the unemployment rate, noting that it would be more credible to focus on labor market outcomes that have been achieved in the recent past or that—given how high the unemployment rate currently is—such guidance would clearly signal a high degree of accommodation for an extended period. a few others suggested that calendar-based guidance—which specifies a date beyond which accommodation could start to be reduced—might be at least as effective as outcome-based guidance. they noted that calendar-based guidance had been very effective when the committee used it in 2011 and 2012 or that it would be very challenging to provide credible outcome-based guidance in light of the substantial uncertainty surrounding the current economic outlook. regardless of the specific form of forward guidance, a couple of participants expressed the concern that policies that effectively committed the committee to maintaining very low interest rates for a long time could ultimately pose significant risks to financial stability. participants agreed that asset purchase programs can promote accommodative financial conditions by putting downward pressure on term premiums and longer-term yields. several participants remarked that declines in the neutral rate of interest and in term premiums over the past decade and prevailing low levels of longer-term yields would likely act as constraints on the effectiveness of asset purchases in the current environment and noted that these constraints were not as acute when the committee implemented such programs in the wake of the global financial crisis. these participants noted, however, that large-scale asset purchases could still be beneficial under current circumstances by offsetting potential upward pressures on longer-term yields or by helping reinforce the committee’s commitment to maintaining highly accommodative financial conditions. a few participants questioned the desirability of large-scale asset purchases following the current purchases to support market functioning, noting that they likely would lead to a further considerable expansion of the federal reserve’s balance sheet or have potentially adverse implications for financial stability. in their discussion of the foreign and historical experience with yct policies and the potential role for such policies in the united states, nearly all participants indicated that they had many questions regarding the costs and benefits of such an approach. among the three episodes discussed in the staff presentation, participants generally saw the australian experience as most relevant for current circumstances in the united states. nonetheless, many participants remarked that, as long as the committee’s forward guidance remained credible on its own, it was not clear that there would be a need for the committee to reinforce its forward guidance with the adoption of a yct policy. in addition, participants raised a number of concerns related to the implementation of yct policies, including how to maintain control of the size and composition of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, particularly as the time to exit from such policies nears; how to combine yct policies—which at least in the australian case incorporate aspects of datebased forward guidance—with the types of outcomebased forward guidance that many participants favored; how to mitigate the risks that yct policies pose to central bank independence; and how to assess the effects of these policies on financial market functioning and the size and composition of private-sector balance sheets. a number of participants commented on additional challenges associated with yct policies focused on the longer portion of the yield curve, including how these policies might interact with large-scale asset purchase minutes of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 5  programs and the extent of additional accommodation they would provide in the current environment of very low interest rates. some of these participants also noted that longer-term yields are importantly influenced by factors such as longer-run inflation expectations and the longer-run neutral real interest rate and that changes in these factors or difficulties in estimating them could result in the central bank inadvertently setting yield caps or targets at inappropriate levels. a couple of participants remarked that an appropriately designed yct policy that focused on the short-to-medium part of the yield curve could serve as a powerful commitment device for the committee. these participants noted that, even if market participants currently expect the federal funds rate to remain at its elb through the medium term, the introduction of an effective yct policy could help prevent those expectations from changing prematurely—as happened during the previous recovery—or that the size of a large-scale asset purchase program, which also poses risks to central bank independence, could be reduced by an effective yct policy. all participants agreed that it would be useful for the staff to conduct further analysis of the design and implementation of yct policies as well as of their likely economic and financial effects. a number of participants emphasized that, when assessing the potential roles that different monetary policy tools might play to support the attainment of the committee’s goals, it was important to think about how various policy tools could be used in coordination as part of the committee’s overall strategy to achieve its dualmandate objectives. in addition, various participants noted that clear communications with the public are central to the efficacy of all policy tools and that, therefore, the committee should complete its monetary policy framework review in the near term, including revising the statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. such a revised statement would communicate to the public how the committee views its policy goals and provide additional context to the committee’s policy actions. developments in financial markets and open market operations the system open market account (soma) manager first discussed developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. risk asset prices were buoyed by optimism about the potential for increased economic activity associated with reopenings as parts of the united states and other countries relaxed lockdown restrictions. that optimism was reinforced by high-frequency data suggesting a pickup in economic activity. market participants also pointed to the suite of u.s. and global policy measures taken since mid-march as laying a foundation for the improvement in risk sentiment. against this backdrop, staff analysis suggested that equity prices had been supported by expectations for a strong rebound in earnings next year, low risk-free rates and positive risk sentiment. despite this improvement in risk sentiment, market participants expected weak overall growth in 2020, and elevated uncertainties in the outlook remained. the manager noted that prospects for adverse developments regarding the coronavirus (covid-19) and the potential for financial strains to amplify recessionary dynamics, and geopolitical developments, including renewed u.s.–china tensions, presented near term risks to financial markets. market participants were also attentive to the recent steepening in the treasury yield curve and noted a range of uncertainties in the outlook for longer-term rates. regarding expectations for monetary policy, respondents to the open market trading desk’s surveys suggested that most market participants did not anticipate policy changes at the june meeting. the target range for the federal funds rate was expected to remain at the elb for at least the next couple of years, although many survey respondents attached some probability to the target range increasing in 2022. although the rates implied by federal funds futures contracts settling next year had fallen to slightly negative levels in may, survey respondents attached very little probability to the possibility of negative policy rates. the manager turned to a discussion of federal reserve operations. credit facilities, some of which became operational over the period, generally experienced modest activity in light of broad improvements in credit market conditions. new usage across many funding operations and facilities had declined over the intermeeting period as conditions in funding markets improved. the manager noted that a significant proportion of amounts outstanding under u.s. dollar liquidity swaps and repurchase agreements (repo) reflected term transactions initiated during the period of funding market strains. in light of the improvement in funding market conditions, the manager noted that it might be appropriate to make a modest adjustment to the minimum bid rates on repo operations in the forthcoming calendar, which would effectively position these operations in a backstop role. these adjustments were not expected to have any significant effects in short-term funding markets. finally, the manager discussed the near-term plans for purchases of treasury securities and agency mortgagebacked securities (mbs). overall, functioning in the page 6 federal open market committee  markets for these securities had improved substantially. in light of these improvements, the desk had gradually reduced the pace of purchases over the intermeeting period, to their current levels of $4 billion per day in treasury securities and $4.5 billion per day in agency mbs. these purchase amounts were significantly lower than the peak pace in mid-march and roughly corresponded to monthly increases in soma holdings of approximately $80 billion in treasury securities and $40 billion in agency mbs. continuing to increase holdings at this pace would likely help sustain the improvements in market functioning, and seemed to be roughly in line with market expectations for treasury purchases, and toward the lower end of expectations for agency mbs purchases, net of reinvestments. in addition, principal payments from agency debt and agency mbs held in the soma portfolio could continue to be reinvested in agency mbs. weekly operations in agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) would also be conducted. the desk was prepared to increase the size or adjust the composition of treasury, agency mbs and agency cmbs purchases as needed to sustain smooth market functioning in the markets for these securities. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the coronavirus outbreak and the measures undertaken to contain its spread were severely disrupting economic activity in the united states and abroad. the available information for the june 9–10 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) would likely post a historically large decline in the second quarter. labor market conditions improved in may, but these improvements were modest relative to the substantial deterioration seen over the previous two months. consumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce), slowed notably through april, reflecting the effects of both weak aggregate demand and low energy prices. total nonfarm payroll employment expanded strongly in may, though by much less than the historic job losses recorded in april. the unemployment rate moved down to 13.3 percent in may after soaring to 14.7 percent in april. as was highlighted by the bureau of labor statistics, these figures likely understated the extent of unemployment; accounting for the unusually large number of workers who reported themselves as employed but absent from their jobs would have raised the unemployment rate by 5 percentage points in april and 3 percentage points in may. both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio increased in may. initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits had declined through the last week of may from their peak in late march, but they still were at a historically elevated level. average hourly earnings for all employees declined in may after rising sharply in april, but these fluctuations largely reflected the substantial changes in the level and composition of employment, which disproportionately affected lower-wage workers. the employment cost index for total labor compensation in the private sector increased 2.8 percent over the 12 months ending in march—a period mostly predating the onset of the pandemic—and was the same as its yearearlier pace. total pce price inflation was only 0.5 percent over the 12 months ending in april, reflecting both weak aggregate demand in recent months and a considerable drop in consumer energy prices. prices fell in march and april in many categories that were affected the most by social-distancing measures, such as the prices for air travel and hotel accommodations. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.0 percent over the 12 months ending in april. in contrast, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 1.9 percent in april. the consumer price index (cpi) inched up 0.1 percent over the 12 months ending in may, while core cpi inflation was 1.2 percent over the same period. recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. the university of michigan surveys of consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years edged up in may, while the 3-yearahead measure from the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations was unchanged. the 10-year measure for pce price inflation from the survey of professional forecasters ticked down in the second quarter. all of these measures of longerrun inflation expectations continued to be near their recent ranges. real pce slumped in april, with declines widespread across most spending categories. in may, however, light motor vehicle sales and some other high-frequency indicators of consumer spending turned up, but the levels of these indicators were mostly still below their levels early in the year. real disposable personal income increased significantly in april, as a marked decline in wage and minutes of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 7  salary income was more than offset by a substantial boost from government transfer payments due to recent fiscal policy support; as a result, the personal saving rate soared. the consumer sentiment measures from both the michigan survey and the conference board survey crept up in may but remained below their levels early in the year. real residential investment appeared to be weakening significantly in the second quarter. starts and building permit issuance for single-family homes, along with starts of multifamily units, dropped sharply in april. sales of existing homes contracted markedly in april, although new home sales edged up. real business fixed investment continued to tumble in the second quarter. nominal new orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft decreased considerably in april. nominal business spending for nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector also fell in april. in addition, the effects of low crude oil prices were evident in further declines in the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation through early june, an indicator of business spending on structures in the drilling and mining sector. total industrial production plunged in april, as many factories slowed or suspended operation in response to the coronavirus pandemic. the decline in manufacturing production was widespread across all major industries and was led by a collapse in the output of motor vehicles and related parts. output in the mining sector—which includes crude oil extraction—also decreased, reflecting the effects of low crude oil prices. total real government purchases appeared to be rising moderately in the second quarter. federal defense spending continued to increase in april, and nondefense purchases were likely to be boosted in the second quarter by recent fiscal policy measures related to the coronavirus. in contrast, state and local purchases looked to be declining, as the payrolls of these governments shrank in april and may, and nominal state and local construction expenditures decreased in april. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit widened in both march and april, as exports of goods and services plunged more than imports. the fall in goods exports was broad based, with particularly sharp declines in automotive products, industrial supplies, and capital goods. goods imports also contracted significantly in most categories through april, and a near halt of international travel drove a steep decline in exports and imports of services. foreign economic activity contracted in the first quarter, even though most countries abroad introduced strict social-distancing measures to contain the spread of the coronavirus only toward the end of the quarter. in china, where restrictions were largely lifted by the end of the first quarter, data pointed to a relatively quick rebound in economic activity in the second quarter. outside of china, indicators suggested that foreign economic activity plummeted further in the second quarter, notwithstanding some signs of improvement in may as restrictions started to ease. inflation rates fell sharply across most foreign economies in april and may. the low level of oil prices relative to a year ago contributed to 12-month inflation rates close to or below zero in many advanced foreign economies (afes). staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, risk sentiment improved, on net, as optimism over reopening the economy, potential coronavirus treatments, the unexpectedly positive may employment situation report, and other indicators that suggest that economic activity may be rebounding more than offset concerns arising from otherwise dire economic data releases, warnings from health experts that openings may have been premature, and renewed tensions between the united states and china. equity prices rose, and corporate bond spreads narrowed notably. the treasury yield curve steepened, and the marketimplied expected path of the federal funds rate declined somewhat. liquidity conditions continued to improve in general, but some stress was still evident in several markets. financing conditions were still somewhat strained for lower-rated borrowers and small businesses even as announcements and implementation of federal reserve facilities during the intermeeting period were supportive of credit flows. the credit quality of businesses and municipal debt weakened. the expected path of the federal funds rate for the next few years, based on a straight read of overnight index swap quotes, declined a bit and remained close to the elb through late 2023. market-implied forward rates referring to 2021 and 2022 turned slightly negative for a few days beginning on may 7, though market commentary suggested that this development did not reflect investors expecting the fomc to lower the federal funds rate target range below zero. this view was supported by federal reserve communications that negative interest rates did not appear to be an attractive policy tool. the treasury yield curve steepened over the intermeeting period, with 2-year yields little changed while 10- and 30-year yields rose. longer-term yields were likely page 8 federal open market committee  boosted by expectations of heavy upcoming treasury security issuance as well as some unwinding of safe-haven demands in connection with improved investor sentiment. the treasury’s first 20-year bond offering since 1986 was met with solid demand. changes in inflation compensation based on treasury inflation-protected securities yields were mixed; 5-year inflation compensation rose amid the recent partial rebound in crude oil prices, while the 5-to-10-year measure edged down. at the end of the intermeeting period, both measures stood roughly halfway between their mid-march lows and typical levels seen in recent years. broad stock price indexes moved higher. one-month implied volatility on the s&p 500 index declined somewhat but still stood at the 85th percentile of its distribution since 1990. spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds over comparablematurity treasury yields narrowed considerably but remained at levels similar to those in other periods of notable economic or bond market stress, though well below financial crisis levels. over the intermeeting period, financial market functioning appeared to improve in general, although progress was uneven. liquidity measures improved in the treasury market, but off-the-run treasury securities of all tenors and longer-maturity on-the-run securities remained less liquid than before the onset of the pandemic. agency mbs market functioning had largely recovered, except for some less liquid parts of the market. corporate bond market liquidity improved considerably but remained somewhat strained, particularly for speculativegrade bonds. liquidity in the municipal bond markets was still below pre-pandemic levels. conditions in unsecured short-term funding markets continued to improve over the intermeeting period, and spreads on most types of commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit narrowed to levels that approached pre-pandemic ranges. amid better market conditions, take-up in the emergency liquidity facilities declined substantially. heavy demand for treasury bills from money market funds held down rates despite an unprecedented pace of issuance. the effective federal funds rate was 5 basis points almost every day over the intermeeting period, and the secured overnight financing rate averaged 4 basis points. total outstanding federal reserve repos averaged about $170 billion. amid improving market functioning, federal reserve purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs were reduced from around $10 billion and $8 billion per day, respectively, to $4 billion and $4.5 billion per day, respectively, over the intermeeting period. risk sentiment in foreign financial markets improved over the intermeeting period. further monetary policy and fiscal policy support in foreign countries, the easing of coronavirus-related restrictions, and a stronger-thanexpected u.s. may employment report outweighed concerns about otherwise weak global economic data and the resurgence of u.s.–china tensions. liquidity in global dollar funding markets continued to improve, helped in part by the federal reserve’s liquidity programs, and prices of foreign risky assets increased. in the afes, option-implied volatility measures declined and long-term sovereign bond yields rose moderately, while fiscal stimulus in japan and europe boosted prices in their respective equity markets. euro-area peripheral bond spreads narrowed after the european commission proposed that the european union be given the authority to borrow €750 billion to assist the recovery and the european central bank (ecb) increased the size of its pandemic emergency purchase programme. in emerging markets, the rise in oil prices since late april and overall improvements in investor sentiment boosted asset prices, even as the coronavirus outbreak worsened in some countries. outflows from emerging market funds slowed and then turned into small inflows later in the period. the improving risk sentiment also supported several foreign currencies, and the staff’s broad dollar index fell. the euro appreciated notably over the period, lifted in part by the european fiscal and monetary policy communications. the recent rebound in oil prices contributed to a strong appreciation of the canadian dollar, the brazilian real, and the mexican peso. financing conditions for nonfinancial firms eased somewhat over the intermeeting period, though they remained moderately strained for lower-rated borrowers. investment-grade corporate bond issuance soared to record levels in april and remained robust in may, as issuers took advantage of more favorable market conditions following federal reserve announcements of two facilities to support corporate credit markets. regarding these facilities, the secondary market corporate credit facility began in mid-may to purchase exchange-traded funds whose investment objective is to provide broad exposure to the market for u.s. corporate bonds. speculative-grade corporate bond issuance picked up considerably toward the end of april from very low levels, though it slowed somewhat in may. commercial and industrial loans on banks’ books surged again in april, minutes of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 9  largely driven by lending through the paycheck protection program (ppp), especially at smaller banks. creditline drawdowns continued in april and may, though drawdowns by large firms slowed considerably from record levels in march. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations continued to deteriorate sharply during the intermeeting period. the volume of nonfinancial corporate bond and leveraged loan downgrades remained very high in april and may. defaults in corporate bonds and leveraged loans increased as well; market analysts projected defaults to increase considerably over the remainder of 2020 and into 2021. financing conditions for small businesses tightened amid widespread continued pandemic-related closures and reduced operations of small businesses. lenders indicated that they had tightened loan standards on small business loans or discontinued lending to such borrowers altogether (other than ppp loans). financing conditions for state and local governments improved moderately following several federal reserve announcements to support the municipal debt market, but conditions remained somewhat strained for lower-rated states and municipalities. in the first week of june, the state of illinois became the first to use the municipal liquidity facility. commercial real estate (cre) lending conditions recovered somewhat during the intermeeting period. spreads on triple-a-rated and triple-b-rated non-agency cmbs declined in may but remained elevated relative to before the pandemic, and issuance showed signs of recovery in late april and early may. federal reserve purchases of agency cmbs reportedly helped return spreads on these securities to their pre-pandemic levels, and issuance in that market continued to be strong. however, early signs of credit repayment difficulties emerged in some cre sectors. the volume of mortgage rate locks for home-purchase loans picked up in mid-may following a material drop in april. financing conditions remained tight for borrowers with relatively low credit scores and for those seeking nonconforming mortgages. in addition, options for home equity extraction continued to be restricted, as credit for both home equity lines of credit and cash-out refinances was limited. servicers were able to handle the liquidity strains imposed by forbearance. the sharp decline in economic activity had also curtailed the demand for consumer credit. on balance, consumer credit financing conditions did not appear to be a major drag on household spending. issuance of consumer asset-backed securities resumed in mid-april and in early may but remained significantly below pre-pandemic levels. staff economic outlook the projection for the u.s. economy prepared by the staff for the june fomc meeting was downgraded, on balance, as compared with the april meeting forecast in response to information on the spread of the coronavirus and changes in the measures undertaken to contain it both at home and abroad, along with incoming economic data. u.s. real gdp was forecast to show a historically large decline in the second quarter of this year, and the unemployment rate was expected to be sharply higher than in the first quarter. the substantial fiscal policy measures and appreciable support from monetary policy, along with the federal reserve’s liquidity and lending facilities, were expected to help mitigate the deterioration in current economic conditions and to help boost the recovery. the staff continued to judge that the future performance of the economy would depend importantly on the evolution of the coronavirus outbreak and the measures undertaken to contain it. under the staff’s baseline assumptions that the current restrictions on social interactions and business operations would continue to ease gradually this year, real gdp was forecast to rise appreciably and the unemployment rate to decline considerably in the second half of the year, although a complete recovery was not expected by year-end. inflation was projected to weaken this year, reflecting both the deterioration in resource utilization and sizable expected declines in consumer energy prices. under the baseline assumptions, economic conditions were projected to continue to improve, and inflation to pick back up, over the next two years. the staff still observed that the uncertainty related to the economic effects of the coronavirus pandemic was extremely elevated and that the historical behavior of the u.s. economy in response to past economic shocks provided limited guidance for making judgments about how the economy might evolve in the future. in light of the significant uncertainty and downside risks associated with the pandemic, including how much the economy would weaken and how long it would take to recover, the staff judged that a more pessimistic projection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast. in this scenario, a second wave of the coronavirus outbreak, with another round of strict limitations on social interactions and business operations, was assumed to begin later this page 10 federal open market committee  year, leading to a decrease in real gdp, a jump in the unemployment rate, and renewed downward pressure on inflation next year. compared with the baseline, the disruption to economic activity was more severe and protracted in this scenario, with real gdp and inflation lower and the unemployment rate higher by the end of the medium-term projection. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2020 through 2022 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy—including the path for the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. these projections are described in the summary of economic projections, which is an addendum to these minutes. participants noted that the coronavirus outbreak was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. the virus and the measures taken to protect public health induced sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job losses. weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. financial conditions had improved, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants agreed that lowering the federal funds rate to its elb had established more accommodative financial conditions and that the federal reserve’s ongoing purchases of sizable quantities of treasury securities and agency mbs had helped restore smooth market functioning to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the fiscal response to economic developments had been large and timely and was providing much needed support for economic activity. credit flows and economic activity were also being supported by the lending facilities established under the authority of section 13(3) of the federal reserve act with the approval of the secretary of the treasury. participants judged that the effects of the coronavirus outbreak and the ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and would pose considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. participants agreed that the data for the second quarter would likely show the largest decline in economic activity in post–world war ii history. based in part on information from their districts, participants observed that the burdens of the present crisis were not falling equally on all americans and noted that the rise in joblessness was especially severe for lower-wage workers, women, african americans, and hispanics. participants agreed that recently enacted fiscal policy programs had been delivering valuable direct financial aid to households, businesses, and communities, as well as providing relief to disadvantaged groups. regarding household spending, participants pointed to information from district contacts, to surveys of consumer behavior, and to high-frequency indicators—such as credit card transactions, automated teller machine visits, and cellphone data tracking—as suggesting that consumer expenditures may be stabilizing or rebounding modestly. limited available sources of standard economic data, such as retail purchases and motor vehicle sales, also seemed in line with this impression. with supportive monetary policy and payments to households under the cares act (coronavirus aid, relief, and economic security act), including enhanced unemployment insurance payments, participants expected personal consumption expenditures to grow strongly in the second half of the year, albeit from very low levels. however, the recovery in consumer spending was not expected to be particularly rapid beyond this year, with voluntary social distancing, precautionary saving, and lower levels of employment and income restraining the pace of expansion over the medium term. participants noted that levels of uncertainty and risks perceived by businesses remained high and that these factors continued to contribute to restraints on capital expenditures, despite easing in financing conditions stemming in part from recent policy measures. some business contacts pointed to halting improvements in consumer demand, a dearth in public infrastructure projects due to strained state and local government budget conditions, or the decline in energy prices as factors likely to depress business spending. some participants also noted reports of firms stating that they have had some challenges in rehiring employees, in part related to temporary enhanced unemployment insurance benefits. participants generally agreed that practices and developments in public health to address the pandemic would be critical for ensuring a strong and lasting reopening of businesses and reducing the likelihood of an outsized wave of closures, but monetary policy and, especially, minutes of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 11  fiscal policy would play important roles. nevertheless, participants concluded that voluntary social distancing and structural shifts stemming from the pandemic would likely mean that some proportion of businesses would close permanently. noting ongoing changes in the composition of production and the processes by which production takes place, participants suggested that some business adaptations were likely to endure long after the coronavirus subsides, resulting in notable dislocation and sectoral reallocation of firms and workers across industries. participants noted that conditions in the energy sector remained difficult amid still-low oil prices. several participants anticipated continued low drilling activity, at least until excess inventories were reduced later this year, and expressed concern that a wave of bankruptcies in the energy sector could be forthcoming. in addition, the agricultural sector continued to be under stress due to low prices for some farm commodities, reduced ethanol production, and pandemic-related limitations on production for some food processing plants. with regard to the labor market, participants remarked on the surprisingly positive news from the labor market report for may but emphasized that nearly 20 million jobs had been lost, on net, since february. participants noted that because of misclassification errors in the current population survey, the official unemployment rate for may likely understated the extent of unemployment; others observed that government reliance on unemployment insurance as a vehicle for income support under the cares act complicates the interpretation of the data. participants also noted that unemployment insurance claims continued to run at a historically elevated level, but the proportion of laid-off workers who expected to be recalled was unusually large. taken together, the data suggested that april could turn out to be the trough of the recession, but participants agreed that it was too early to draw any firm conclusions. prospects for further substantial improvement in the labor market were seen as depending on a sustained reopening of the economy, which in turn depended in large part on the efficacy of health measures taken to limit the effects of the coronavirus. on this issue, participants judged there to be a great deal of uncertainty and expressed concerns about the possibility that an early reopening would contribute to a significant increase of infections. participants also regarded highly accommodative monetary policy and sustained support from fiscal policy as likely to be needed to facilitate a durable recov- ery in labor market conditions. overall, participants expected that a full recovery in employment would take some time. with regard to inflation, participants reiterated their view that the negative effect from the pandemic on aggregate demand was likely to more than offset any upward pressure from supply constraints so that the overall effect of the outbreak on prices was seen as disinflationary. consistent with that interpretation, participants observed the recent negative readings on the monthly cpi and noted that they anticipated that the 12-month pce inflation measure would likely run well below the committee’s 2 percent objective for some time. observing that inflation had been running somewhat below the committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective before the coronavirus outbreak, some participants noted a risk that long-term inflation expectations might deteriorate. participants noted that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy would likely be needed for some time to achieve the 2 percent inflation objective over the longer run. participants commented that there remained an extraordinary amount of uncertainty and considerable risks to the economic outlook. participants shared views on possible outcomes for the reopening of the economy, the prospects for effective voluntary social distancing, and the efficacy of public health initiatives for their implications for economic activity and employment. a number of participants judged that there was a substantial likelihood of additional waves of outbreaks, which, in some scenarios, could result in further economic disruptions and possibly a protracted period of reduced economic activity. other possibilities included economic activity that might recover more quickly if sizable, widespread outbreaks could be avoided even as households and businesses relax or modify social-distancing behaviors. among the other sources of risk noted by participants were that fiscal support for households, businesses, and state and local governments might prove to be insufficient and that foreign economies could come under greater pressure than anticipated as a result of the spread of the pandemic abroad. participants stressed that measures taken in the areas of health-care policy and fiscal policy, together with actions by households and businesses, would shape the prospects for a prompt and timely return of the u.s. economy to more normal conditions. in addition, participants agreed that recent actions taken by the federal reserve had helped reduce risks to the economic outlook. page 12 federal open market committee  as part of their discussions of longer-run risks, participants noted that in some adverse scenarios, more business closures would occur, and workers would experience longer spells of unemployment that could lead to a loss of skills that could impair their employment prospects. in addition, to the extent that transmissionmitigation procedures adopted by firms reduced their productivity, or if the reallocation of industry output resulted in a lasting reduction in business investment, the longer-run level of potential output could be reduced. regarding developments in financial markets, participants agreed that ongoing actions by the federal reserve, including those undertaken in collaboration with the treasury, had helped ease strains in some financial markets and supported the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities. measures of market functioning in the markets for treasury securities and agency mbs had improved substantially since march. strains in short-term funding markets had receded as well, and the volume of borrowing at many of the federal reserve’s liquidity facilities had moved lower as borrowers returned to market sources of funding. risk spreads across a range of fixed-income markets had narrowed as the intense flight to safety witnessed in financial markets in the spring ebbed further. in their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. in light of their assessment that the ongoing public health crisis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term, all participants judged that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. keeping the target range at the elb would continue to provide support to the economy and promote the committee’s maximumemployment and price-stability goals. participants also judged that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at its present level until policymakers were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. participants also agreed that, to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, over coming months it would be appropriate for the federal reserve to increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs and agency cmbs at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. in addition, the desk would continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. participants noted that it would be important to continue to monitor developments closely and that the committee would be prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate. participants also commented that the lending facilities established by the federal reserve under the authority of section 13(3) of the federal reserve act were supporting financial market functioning and the flow of credit to households, businesses of all sizes, and state and local governments. several participants commented further that it would be important for the federal reserve to remain ready to adjust these emergency lending facilities as appropriate based on its monitoring of financial market functioning and credit conditions. participants agreed that the current stance of monetary policy remained appropriate, but many noted that the committee could, at upcoming meetings, further clarify its intentions with respect to its future monetary policy decisions as the economic outlook becomes clearer. in particular, most participants commented that the committee should communicate a more explicit form of forward guidance for the path of the federal funds rate and provide more clarity regarding purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs as more information about the trajectory of the economy becomes available. a number of participants judged that it was important for forward guidance and asset purchases to be structured in a way that provides the accommodation necessary to support rapid economic recovery and fosters a durable return of inflation and inflation expectations to levels consistent with the committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. many participants remarked that the completion of the monetary policy framework review, together with the announcement of the conclusions arising from the review and the release of a revised committee statement on its goals and policy strategy, would help clarify further how the committee intends to conduct monetary policy going forward. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the coronavirus outbreak was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. the virus and the measures taken to protect public health had induced sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job minutes of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 13  losses. consumer price inflation was being held down by weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices. financial conditions had improved, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households, businesses, and communities. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. members further concurred that the ongoing public health crisis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable downside risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. in light of these developments, members decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. members noted that they expected to maintain this target range until they were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. members agreed that they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global developments and muted inflation pressures, and would use the committee’s tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, members noted that they would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to the committee’s maximum-employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. this assessment would take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, members agreed that over coming months it would be appropriate for the federal reserve to increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs and agency cmbs at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. in addition, the desk would continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. members agreed that they would closely monitor developments and be prepared to adjust their plans as appropriate. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective june 11, 2020, the federal open market committee directs the desk to:        undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs), and agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) at least at the current pace to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs and all principal payments from holdings of agency cmbs in agency cmbs. allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. page 14 federal open market committee  the coronavirus outbreak is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. the virus and the measures taken to protect public health have induced sharp declines in economic activity and a surge in job losses. weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices are holding down consumer price inflation. financial conditions have improved, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. reserve will increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. in addition, the open market desk will continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repurchase agreement operations. the committee will closely monitor developments and is prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate.” the ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. in light of these developments, the committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. the committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, patrick harker, robert s. kaplan, neel kashkari, loretta j. mester, and randal k. quarles. the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global developments and muted inflation pressures, and will use its tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, the committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. this assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, over coming months the federal voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective june 11, 2020. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, july 28–29, 2020. the meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on june 10, 2020. notation vote by notation vote completed on may 19, 2020, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on april 28–29, 2020.  james a. clouse secretary page 1  summary of economic projections in conjunction with the federal open market committee (fomc) meeting held on june 9–10, 2020, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (gdp) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2020 to 2022 and over the longer run. each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run value—and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. the longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.1 “appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. the current projections for real activity, the labor market, and inflation were substantially weaker than the projections in the december 2019 summary of economic projections (sep) because participants revised their economic outlook in light of the effects of the coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic and the measures taken to contain it.2 table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections; participants’ projections in the current sep reflected their assumptions about the course of the pandemic and actions to control its spread. all participants projected that real gdp will contract sharply in 2020 and that the unemployment rate in the final quarter of the year would be markedly higher than they had projected in december. almost all participants projected that real gdp would grow faster than their estimates of its longer-run normal growth rate in 2021 and 2022 and that the unemployment rate would decline. participants expected that a full economic recovery would take some time, with almost all participants projecting that the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2022 would still be above their estimates of its level in the longer run. one participant did not submit longer-run projections for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. 1 similarly, almost all participants projected that total inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce), would be below the fomc’s 2 percent inflation objective throughout the forecast period. projections for core pce inflation, which excludes food and energy, generally followed a trajectory similar to the projections for total inflation. as shown in figure 2, almost all participants indicated that their expectations regarding the evolution of the economy, relative to the committee’s objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, would likely warrant keeping the federal funds rate at its current level through at least the end of 2022. the median of participants’ assessments of the longer-run level for the federal funds rate was unchanged from its value in the december sep. amid uncertainty about the course of the pandemic and its effects on the economy, all participants regarded the uncertainties around their projections as higher than the average over the past 20 years. in addition, a substantial majority of participants assessed the risks to their outlook for real gdp growth as weighted to the downside and the risks to their unemployment rate projections as weighted to the upside. the risks to inflation projections were judged as weighted to the downside by a substantial majority of participants; no participant assessed the risks to his or her inflation outlook as weighted to the upside. the outlook for real gdp growth and the unemployment rate as illustrated in figure 3.a, which shows the distributions of participants’ projections for real gdp growth from 2020 to 2022 and in the longer run, all participants projected that real gdp will decline in 2020, a development that reflects the coronavirus outbreak and the measures undertaken to contain its spread. the projections ranged from a decline of 10.0 percent to a decline of 4.2 percent, with the median projection being a decrease of 6.5 percent. these projections were substantially weaker than those from the december sep when real gdp was expected to expand this year at close to participants’ estimates of its longer-run rate. current ex- the preceding sep occurred in december 2019. because of the extraordinary circumstances surrounding the march 2020 fomc meeting, participants did not submit quarterly economic projections at that meeting. 2 page 2 federal open market committee   table 1. economic projections of federal reserve board members and federal reserve bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, june 2020 percent central tendency2 median1 range3 variable 2020 2021 2022 longer run 2020 2021 2022 longer run 2020 2021 2022 longer run change in real gdp december projection -6.5 2.0 5.0 1.9 3.5 1.8 1.8 1.9 -7.6– -5.5 2.0–2.2 4.5–6.0 1.8–2.0 3.0–4.5 1.8–2.0 1.7–2.0 1.8–2.0 -10.0– -4.2 1.8–2.3 -1.0–7.0 1.7–2.2 2.0–6.0 1.5–2.2 1.6–2.2 1.7–2.2 unemployment rate december projection 9.3 3.5 6.5 3.6 5.5 3.7 4.1 4.1 9.0–10.0 3.5–3.7 5.9–7.5 3.5–3.9 4.8–6.1 3.5–4.0 4.0–4.3 3.9–4.3 7.0–14.0 3.3–3.8 4.5–12.0 3.3–4.0 4.0–8.0 3.3–4.1 3.5–4.7 3.5–4.5 pce inflation december projection 0.8 1.9 1.6 2.0 1.7 2.0 2.0 2.0 0.6–1.0 1.8–1.9 1.4–1.7 2.0–2.1 1.6–1.8 2.0–2.2 2.0 2.0 0.5–1.2 1.7–2.1 1.1–2.0 1.8–2.3 1.4–2.2 1.8–2.2 2.0 2.0 core pce inflation4 december projection 1.0 1.9 1.5 2.0 1.7 2.0 0.9–1.1 1.9–2.0 1.4–1.7 2.0–2.1 1.6–1.8 2.0–2.2 0.7–1.3 1.7–2.1 1.2–2.0 1.8–2.3 1.2–2.2 1.8–2.2 0.1 1.6 0.1 1.9 0.1 2.1 0.1 1.6–1.9 0.1 1.6–2.1 0.1 1.9–2.6 0.1 1.6–1.9 0.1 1.6–2.4 0.1–1.1 1.6–2.9 memo: projected appropriate policy path federal funds rate december projection 2.5 2.5 2.3–2.5 2.4–2.8 note: projections of change in real gross domestic product (gdp) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. pce inflation and core pce inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce) and the price index for pce excluding food and energy. projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. the projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. the december projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the federal open market committee on december 10–11, 2019. one participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real gdp, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the december 10–11, 2019, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the june 9–10, 2020, meeting. no projections were submitted in conjunction with the march 2020 fomc meeting. 1. for each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. when the number of projections is even, the median is the average of the two middle projections. 2. the central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. the range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. longer-run projections for core pce inflation are not collected. 2.0–3.0 2.0–3.3 summary of economic projections of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 3  figure 1. medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2020–22 and over the longer run percent change in real gdp 8 6 4 2 actual 0 −2 −4 median of projections central tendency of projections range of projections −6 −8 −10 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 longer run percent unemployment rate 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 longer run percent pce inflation 3 2 1 0 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 longer run percent core pce inflation 3 2 1 0 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 longer run note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. the data for the actual values of the variables are annual. page 4 federal open market committee  figure 2. fomc participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate percent 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 2020 2021 2022 longer run note: each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. one participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. summary of economic projections of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 5   figure 3.a. distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real gdp, 2020–22 and over the longer run number of participants 2020 −10.0− −9.9 −9.4− −9.3 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 june projections december projections −8.8− −8.7 −8.2− −8.1 −7.6− −7.5 −7.0− −6.9 −6.4− −6.3 −5.8− −5.7 −5.2− −5.1 −4.6− −4.5 −4.0− −3.9 −3.4− −3.3 −2.8− −2.7 −2.2− −2.1 −1.6− −1.5 −1.0− −0.9 −0.4− −0.3 0.2− 0.3 0.8− 0.9 1.4− 1.5 2.0− 2.1 2.6− 2.7 3.2− 3.3 3.8− 3.9 4.4− 4.5 5.0− 5.1 5.6− 5.7 6.2− 6.3 6.8− 6.9 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2021 −10.0− −9.9 −9.4− −9.3 −8.8− −8.7 −8.2− −8.1 −7.6− −7.5 −7.0− −6.9 −6.4− −6.3 −5.8− −5.7 −5.2− −5.1 −4.6− −4.5 −4.0− −3.9 −3.4− −3.3 −2.8− −2.7 −2.2− −2.1 −1.6− −1.5 −1.0− −0.9 −0.4− −0.3 0.2− 0.3 0.8− 0.9 1.4− 1.5 2.0− 2.1 2.6− 2.7 3.2− 3.3 3.8− 3.9 4.4− 4.5 5.0− 5.1 5.6− 5.7 6.2− 6.3 6.8− 6.9 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2022 −10.0− −9.9 −9.4− −9.3 −8.8− −8.7 −8.2− −8.1 −7.6− −7.5 −7.0− −6.9 −6.4− −6.3 −5.8− −5.7 −5.2− −5.1 −4.6− −4.5 −4.0− −3.9 −3.4− −3.3 −2.8− −2.7 −2.2− −2.1 −1.6− −1.5 −1.0− −0.9 −0.4− −0.3 0.2− 0.3 0.8− 0.9 1.4− 1.5 2.0− 2.1 2.6− 2.7 3.2− 3.3 3.8− 3.9 4.4− 4.5 5.0− 5.1 5.6− 5.7 6.2− 6.3 6.8− 6.9 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 longer run −10.0− −9.9 −9.4− −9.3 −8.8− −8.7 −8.2− −8.1 −7.6− −7.5 −7.0− −6.9 −6.4− −6.3 −5.8− −5.7 −5.2− −5.1 −4.6− −4.5 −4.0− −3.9 −3.4− −3.3 −2.8− −2.7 −2.2− −2.1 −1.6− −1.5 −1.0− −0.9 percent range note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. −0.4− −0.3 0.2− 0.3 0.8− 0.9 1.4− 1.5 2.0− 2.1 2.6− 2.7 3.2− 3.3 3.8− 3.9 4.4− 4.5 5.0− 5.1 5.6− 5.7 6.2− 6.3 6.8− 6.9 page 6 federal open market committee  pectations were generally for economic activity to recover during the next couple of years. almost all participants expected that the rate of real gdp growth in 2021 and 2022 would be above their estimates of its longerrun pace, with the median projections being 5.0 percent and 3.5 percent, respectively. the distribution of estimates of real gdp growth in the longer run was little changed from the december sep, although the median projection ticked down to 1.8 percent. the distributions of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate from 2020 to 2022 and in the longer run are shown in figure 3.b. reflecting the effects of the pandemic, the projections for the unemployment rate were revised up considerably throughout the forecast period relative to the december sep. the projections for the unemployment rate in the final quarter of this year ranged from 7.0 to 14.0 percent, with a median of 9.3 percent. for the final quarter of 2021, the projections for the unemployment rate ranged from 4.5 to 12.0 percent, with the median being 6.5 percent. the width of the ranges of the forecasts for the unemployment rate in the final quarters of this year and next year were 7.0 percentage points and 7.5 percentage points, respectively—more than three times the widest ranges for forecasts of similar horizons that were submitted from 2007 to 2009. this unusually wide range of projections highlighted the challenges of assessing the economic damage caused by the pandemic and of forecasting the recovery in the labor market. the median projection for the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2022, at 5.5 percent, was above the median estimate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment of 4.1 percent. indeed, almost all participants who submitted longerrun projections expected that the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2022 would still be above their estimates of the longer-run value. participants pointed to a number of factors to explain the persistence of labor market slack, including the continuation of voluntary social distancing, unusual disruptions to labor markets, and the need for businesses to restructure supply chains and other aspects of their operations. the distribution of estimates for the longer-run unemployment rate was little changed from the december sep. the outlook for inflation figures 3.c and 3.d show the distributions of participants’ projections for total and core pce inflation from 2020 to 2022 and in the longer run. all participants revised down their projections for inflation in 2020 relative to their december projections. participants expected that, in 2020, total inflation would be between 0.5 and 1.2 percent, while core inflation would be between table 2. average historical projection error ranges percentage points variable 2020 2021 2022 change in real gdp1 . . . . . . . ±1.3 ±1.8 ±2.0 ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.8 ±0.7 ±1.0 ±1.0 ±0.7 ±2.0 ±2.2 unemployment rate1 total consumer prices2 short-term interest ....... ..... rates3 .... note: error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 2000 through 2019 that were released in the summer by various private and government forecasters. as described in the box “forecast uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real gdp, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. for more information, see david reifschneider and peter tulip (2017), “gauging the uncertainty of the economic outlook using historical forecasting errors: the federal reserve’s approach,” finance and economics discussion series 2017-020 (washington: board of governors of the federal reserve system, february), . doi.org/10.17016/feds.2017.020. 1. definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. for federal reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. for other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month treasury bills. projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. 0.7 and 1.3 percent, with median expectations for total and core inflation of 0.8 percent and 1.0 percent, respectively. in the december sep, participants had expected that total inflation would be between 1.7 and 2.3 percent in 2020. in the current sep, almost all participants expected the inflation rate to rise over the next two years. however, the vast majority of participants expected pce price inflation in 2022 to fall short of the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective, with the median projection for total pce price inflation being 1.7 percent. appropriate monetary policy the distributions of participants’ judgments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2020 to 2022 and over the longer run are shown in figure 3.e. with substantial agreement that the unemployment rate would remain above its longer-run level throughout the forecast period and that inflation would run below the committee’s objective of 2 percent, almost all participants projected that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent through at least the end of 2022. the median of participants’ estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate was unchanged from december at 2.50 percent, although a few participants revised down their estimates. summary of economic projections of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 7   figure 3.b. distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2020–22 and over the longer run number of participants 2020 3.2− 3.3 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 june projections december projections 3.8− 3.9 4.4− 4.5 5.0− 5.1 5.6− 5.7 6.2− 6.3 6.8− 6.9 7.4− 7.5 8.0− 8.1 8.6− 8.7 9.2− 9.3 9.8− 9.9 10.4− 10.5 11.0− 11.1 11.6− 11.7 12.2− 12.3 12.8− 12.9 13.4− 13.5 14.0− 14.1 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2021 3.2− 3.3 3.8− 3.9 4.4− 4.5 5.0− 5.1 5.6− 5.7 6.2− 6.3 6.8− 6.9 7.4− 7.5 8.0− 8.1 8.6− 8.7 9.2− 9.3 9.8− 9.9 10.4− 10.5 11.0− 11.1 11.6− 11.7 12.2− 12.3 12.8− 12.9 13.4− 13.5 14.0− 14.1 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2022 3.2− 3.3 3.8− 3.9 4.4− 4.5 5.0− 5.1 5.6− 5.7 6.2− 6.3 6.8− 6.9 7.4− 7.5 8.0− 8.1 8.6− 8.7 9.2− 9.3 9.8− 9.9 10.4− 10.5 11.0− 11.1 11.6− 11.7 12.2− 12.3 12.8− 12.9 13.4− 13.5 14.0− 14.1 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 longer run 3.2− 3.3 3.8− 3.9 4.4− 4.5 5.0− 5.1 5.6− 5.7 6.2− 6.3 6.8− 6.9 7.4− 7.5 8.0− 8.1 8.6− 8.7 percent range note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 9.2− 9.3 9.8− 9.9 10.4− 10.5 11.0− 11.1 11.6− 11.7 12.2− 12.3 12.8− 12.9 13.4− 13.5 14.0− 14.1 page 8 federal open market committee  figure 3.c. distribution of participants’ projections for pce inflation, 2020–22 and over the longer run number of participants 2020 june projections december projections 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants 2022 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 percent range note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 summary of economic projections of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 9  figure 3.d. distribution of participants’ projections for core pce inflation, 2020–22 number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 june projections december projections 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants 2022 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 percent range note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 page 10 federal open market committee  figure 3.e. distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2020–22 and over the longer run number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 june projections december projections 0.13− 0.37 0.38− 0.62 0.63− 0.87 0.88− 1.12 1.13− 1.37 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 3.13− 3.37 percent range number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.13− 0.37 0.38− 0.62 0.63− 0.87 0.88− 1.12 1.13− 1.37 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 3.13− 3.37 percent range number of participants 2022 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.13− 0.37 0.38− 0.62 0.63− 0.87 0.88− 1.12 1.13− 1.37 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 3.13− 3.37 percent range number of participants longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.13− 0.37 0.38− 0.62 0.63− 0.87 0.88− 1.12 1.13− 1.37 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 percent range note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 3.13− 3.37 summary of economic projections of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 11  uncertainty and risk in assessing the appropriate path for monetary policy, fomc participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty surrounding their individual economic projections relative to the average level of uncertainty over the past 20 years are shown in the panels on the left side of figure 4.3 all participants viewed the current uncertainty surrounding each of the four economic variables—real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, total pce inflation, and core pce inflation—as being greater than the average over the past 20 years, which is the first time this situation has occurred since the introduction of the sep in 2007.4 participants’ assessments of the balance of risks to their current economic projections are shown in the panels on the right side of figure 4. a substantial majority of participants judged the risks to their projections for real gdp growth as weighted to the downside and the risks to their unemployment rate projections as weighted to the upside. a substantial majority of participants viewed the risks to their inflation projections as weighted to the downside; no participant assessed the risks to his or her inflation outlook as weighted to the upside. in discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, the course of the pandemic was generally mentioned as a key source of uncertainty. the possibilities of second waves of contagion and delays in as a reference, table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the change in real gdp, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 2000 through 2019. at the end of this summary, the box “forecast uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections. 3 developing a vaccine were seen as potential downside risks to the economic outlook, and faster-thananticipated progress in responding to or treating the coronavirus were seen as potential upside risks. participants also mentioned a number of other unknowns and risk factors related to the outlook, including the extent of supply-side disruptions; possible changes in household behavior; the degree to which business bankruptcies might cause dislocations; the extent of fiscal policy support; and possibly depressed foreign demand given the global nature of the pandemic. several participants also expressed concerns about longer-run issues in the event of a prolonged recession, such as labor market scarring if the unemployment rate remained elevated and inflation persistently undershooting the fomc’s 2 percent inflation objective. participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable uncertainty. because the committee adjusts monetary policy in response to actual and prospective developments over time in key economic variables—such as real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation— uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the federal funds rate importantly reflects the uncertainties about the paths for these economic variables, along with other factors. as with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial. previous sep addendums to the fomc minutes contained figures showing the median projections, along with confidence intervals based on historical forecast errors. because the level of uncertainty about the economic outlook is currently judged to be higher than its historical average as a result of uncertainty about the course of the coronavirus and its effects on the economy, these “fan charts” have been omitted from this addendum. 4 page 12 federal open market committee  figure 4. uncertainty and risks in economic projections number of participants number of participants uncertainty about gdp growth risks to gdp growth june projections december projections lower 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 broadly similar higher june projections december projections weighted to downside broadly balanced number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 weighted to upside number of participants uncertainty about the unemployment rate risks to the unemployment rate 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 lower broadly similar higher 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 weighted to downside broadly balanced number of participants weighted to upside number of participants uncertainty about pce inflation risks to pce inflation 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 lower broadly similar higher 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 weighted to downside broadly balanced number of participants weighted to upside number of participants uncertainty about core pce inflation risks to core pce inflation 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 lower broadly similar higher 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 weighted to downside broadly balanced weighted to upside summary of economic projections of the meeting of june 9–10, 2020 page 13  forecast uncertainty the economic projections provided by the members of the board of governors and the presidents of the federal reserve banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. the economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past monetary policy reports and those prepared by the federal reserve board’s staff in advance of meetings of the federal open market committee (fomc). the projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. for example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (gdp) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. if the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual gdp would expand within a range of 1.7 to 4.3 percent in the current year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the second year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the third year. the corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.3 to 2.7 percent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years. because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2. that is, participants judge whether each economic variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. these judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections. as with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. this uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. if economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. the final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. they suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. it should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-of-year basis. however, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. 
uly 29, 2020 chair powell. good afternoon. the pandemic continues to cause tremendous human and economic hardship here in the united states and around the world. the most important response to this public health crisis has come from our health-care workers, and we remain grateful to them and to the many other essential workers for putting themselves at risk day after day in service to others and to our country. all of us have a role to play in our nation’s response to the pandemic. at the federal reserve, we remain committed to using our tools to do what we can, and for as long as it takes, to provide some relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. in recent months, economic activity picked up as the economy began to reopen. many businesses opened their doors, factories restarted production, and more people left their homes to engage in various activities. as a result, household spending looks to have recovered about half of its earlier decline, although spending for services such as air travel and hotels has shown much less of a pickup. the recovery in household spending also likely owes to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided substantial and timely support to household incomes. in contrast, indicators of business fixed investment have yet to show a recovery. even with the improved economic news in may and june, overall activity remains well below its level before the pandemic, and the contraction in real gdp in the second quarter will likely be the largest on record. the labor market has followed a similar pattern. after precipitous drops in march and april, employment rose strongly in may and june as many people returned to work from temporary layoffs. as a result, of the roughly 22 million jobs that had been lost, about one-third had been regained as of the june payroll report. the unemployment rate declined in may and  june but, at 11.1 percent, remains far above its level before the outbreak and greater than the peak during the global financial crisis. in addition, the downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to bear the burden have been the most affected. in particular, the rise in joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers, for women, and for african americans and hispanics. this reversal of economic fortune has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. the pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. for some goods, including food, supply constraints have led to notably higher prices, adding to the burden for those struggling with lost income. more broadly, however, weaker demand, especially in sectors— such as travel and hospitality—that have been most affected by the pandemic, has held down consumer prices, and, overall, inflation is running well below our symmetric 2 percent objective. along with the recent increases in economic activity have come new challenges. after declining gradually from a peak near the end of april, the number of covid-19 cases has increased sharply in many parts of the country since mid-june. we have thus entered a new phase in containing the virus, which is essential to protect both our health and our economy. as we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the path forward for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on our success in keeping the virus in check. indeed, we have seen some signs in recent weeks that the increase in virus cases and the renewed measures to control it are starting to weigh on economic activity. for example, some measures of consumer spending based on debit card and credit card use have moved down since late june, while recent labor market indicators point to a slowing in job growth, especially among smaller businesses. a full recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it’s safe to reengage in a broad range of activities.  the path forward will also depend on policy actions taken at all levels of government to provide relief and to support the recovery for as long as needed. the federal reserve’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time. we have held our policy rate near zero since mid-march and have stated that we will keep it there until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. we’ve been purchasing sizable quantities of treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities in order to support orderly conditions in the markets, which are vital to the flow of credit in the economy. to sustain smooth market functioning and foster effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions, we will continue to increase our holdings of treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace. these purchases are also fostering more accommodative financial conditions. the federal reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. without access to credit, families could be forced to cut back on necessities or even lose their homes. businesses could be forced to downsize or close, resulting in further job losses and income losses and worsening the downturn. preserving the flow of credit is thus essential for mitigating the damage to the economy and promoting the recovery. many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the treasury department and are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. these programs benefit the economy by providing financing where it is not  otherwise available. in addition, by serving as a backstop to key credit markets, the programs appear to have significantly increased the extension of credit from private lenders. we are deploying these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from congress and the treasury. we will continue to use these powers until we are confident that we are solidly on the road to recovery. this week we extended these programs through the end of the year. when the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the toolbox. as i have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. the fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. we can only create programs or facilities with broad-based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. many borrowers will benefit from these programs, as will the overall economy. but for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. in these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. the fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe in our lifetimes. it will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of the year, and it will take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that. before taking your questions, i’ll provide an update on our review of our monetary policy framework. [clears throat] excuse me. as a reminder, we began this public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices—a first for the federal reserve— early last year. our purpose has been to take a comprehensive look at how we can best meet our  maximum-employment and price-stability objectives in the years ahead, particularly in light of the generally lower level of interest rates around the world. as is evident in our current situation, the lower level of interest rates has reduced the scope for the committee to support the economy by cutting interest rates. our plans to conclude this review were, like so many things, delayed by the pandemic. at this meeting, my colleagues and i resumed our discussions. our focus was on possible enhancements to our statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. this document states our goals, articulates our approach to monetary policy, and serves at the foundation—as the foundation for our policy actions. while i do not have any details to share with you today, i am confident that we will continue to make progress and will wrap up our deliberations in the near future. we understand that the work of the fed touches communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. thank you. i will look forward to your questions. michelle smith. james politi. james politi. hi there. james politi with the financial times. chair powell, the fed today decided to extend dollar liquidity swap lines with a number of central banks around the world. why was that important for the fed? and how concerned are you about dollar shortages persisting over time through the pandemic? chair powell. well, so our—our dollar swap lines—we introduced those back at the beginning of—of this episode after the pandemic made itself present. and dollar funding markets were in very difficult shape at the time. and the introduction of the swap lines has  really restored dollar funding markets around the world to fairly normal levels of activity. and so they kind of served their purpose. but we extended them—i guess, yesterday morning— really to facilitate planning by other central banks and just so people will know that those facilities are still there. we want them to remain in place and be available as long as they are needed. and since, you know, the crisis and the economic fallout from—from the pandemic are far from over, we’re going to leave those in place for the time being. and we’ll leave them in place until we’re confident that they’re no longer needed. there’s nothing that’s going on in the market right now that raises any concerns. it’s just, we want them to be there as a backstop for markets. michelle smith. okay. steve liesman. steve liesman. steve liesman, cnbc. i hope that you can hear me. mr. chairman, given—you’ve said several times now that you have lending, not spending, powers. given that a lot of the capacity of these programs has not been used and, really, barely used, do you think that some of this money that has been dedicated by the treasury to the federal reserve should be considered to be used by congress as direct grants to businesses that are in need right now or to households, given that congress is now saying that money is limited and they shouldn’t take—they do not want to pass a very large stimulus bill? is this money doing the best for the nation as a backstop for federal reserve programs that don’t seem to be being used all that much right now? thank you. and i have a follow-up, sir. chair powell. so they—that—that’s really a question for congress. they—they appropriated that money, and—$454 billion for our facilities, and it’s really a question for them. so you’re right that our facilities have not—we haven’t done as much lending as we thought. but, in very substantial measure, that’s because markets started working again fairly soon after  we announced the facilities, particularly in the corporate credit facilities, also in the muni—in the muni space, and also in the short-term funding facilities—the three of those that we set up. so we didn’t turn out to need the kind of funding that we thought we would. on the other hand, it’s important that the facilities stay in place, and that’s why we extended them yesterday. it’s important that they still stay in place until we’re, you know, very confident that the turmoil from the pandemic and the economic fallout are behind us. so i—i can’t really speak to what congress should do with it, but it’s important that the facilities be there and be fully funded in case the needs do arise down the road. we don’t see them now, but, in case they do arise, they should be there. steve liesman. has any consideration—thank you. has any consideration been given to asking congress to allow the federal reserve to lend to companies in bankruptcy? thank you. chair powell. not that i’m aware of, no. michelle smith. thank you. nick timiraos. [no response] nick, are you there? [no response] unidentified speaker. [aside] i didn’t hear you say that. michelle smith. we’ll go to david gura, nbc. david gura. mr. chairman, thank you very much. no doubt you were paying attention when two of your predecessors were up on capitol hill just a few days ago answering some questions from—from lawmakers. and a question they each answered had to do with the continuation of these pandemic unemployment benefits. and something we’ve heard a lot is that they could be a disincentive to work. both of them addressed that. i wonder if you would as well.  and then, as a follow-up, i wonder what you’ve learned about the degree to which this has led to a widening of the wealth gap in this country, the degree to which maybe people are experiencing two different kinds of—of pandemics here. some are getting through this based on what they’ve saved and the jobs that they have. others are really struggling to get by. and i wonder what role—what additional role the fed could have in, sort of, bridging that—that yawning gap. chair powell. so, on your first question, i wouldn’t want to be giving very detailed, specific advice on particular programs and the level they should be at and that kind of thing. i just will say the following, that, you know, this—this pandemic and its fallout really represents the biggest shock to the u.s. economy in living memory. we went from the lowest levels of unemployment we’d had in 50 years to the highest levels we’ve had in 90 years, and we did it in the space of two months. and i would say that the response from the fiscal authorities was strong, it was fast, it was broad—and appropriately so. and i think we are seeing the results of the earlier strong fiscal actions. when you see the spending that’s happening, when you see small businesses staying in business even though the economy hasn’t fully, successfully, sustainably reopened yet in many places, you are seeing what happens with that—that money. and so, in—in a broad sense, it’s been well spent. it’s kept people in their homes. it’s kept businesses in business. and that’s all a good thing. i think, in the broad scheme of things, that there will be a need both for more support from us and from more fiscal policy. fiscal policy is up to congress. you see the ongoing discussions that they’re having. and it suggests to me that there’s—you know, that both sides, they’re wrangling over—over various provisions but nonetheless believe that there is a need for some additional fiscal support.  and the last thing i’ll say is that if the expansion—even if—sorry. even if the reopening goes well and many, many people go back to work, it’s still going to take a fairly long time for the parts of the economy that are—that involve lots of people getting together in close proximity. and that means that many of the people who were laid off from those industries—and that’s restaurants, you know, bars, hotels, public entertainment, all of those places, travel and accommodation—many of those people are going to find it hard to go back—they can’t go back to their old job. there won’t be enough jobs for them. so i think those people are going to need support. i can’t say what the exact level should be. it’s not our role. but they’re going to need support if they’re to be able to pay their bills, to continue spending money, to remain in their current rental house or—or apartment or a house if they own it. so i think there will be a need. in terms of inequality, really—so i think it’s fair to say that the burdens of the pandemic have fallen on, heavily—they’ve fallen on everyone, but they’ve fallen very heavily on people who work in the service industries in relatively low-paying jobs. so there was a—a figure that came out of some of our research that was that if you make $40,000 a year or less, then 40 percent—you had a 40 percent chance of losing your job in april and may. so it’s falling very heavily on—on people who have the least financial wherewithal to, you know, to bear that. and that happens to be heavily skewed to minorities and to women. so that’s just what the pandemic is doing. you know, in terms of what we’re doing, what we’re trying to do is create an environment in the financial markets and in the economy where those people have the best chance they can have to go back to work to their old job or to a new job. that’s really what we’re doing. everything we do is directed at that.  and, you know, the—i would say—i would say one last thing on inequality. that is, inequality is a—is an issue—has been a growing issue in our country and in our economy for four decades. and you see it—it has many faces. you see it in the relative flattening-out of—of incomes for people in low and—lower and middle incomes as compared to those at the top. you see it in low mobility where people—where the chances of moving up from the bottom to the middle or the top have declined and are lower than they are in other comparable wealthy countries. so it’s a serious economic problem for the united states, but it’s—it’s got underlying causes that are not related to monetary policy or to our response to the pandemic. again, four decades of evidence suggests it’s about globalization. it’s about the flattening-out of educational attainment in the united states compared to our other competitor countries. it’s about technology advancing, too. if you’re on the wrong side of those forces, it’s been—your income has stagnated. so it’s—it’s a critical, critical problem for our society, but one that really falls mainly to fiscal policy and other policies. our part of it is to—is to push as hard as we can on our employment mandate while keeping price stability. we saw what happened to people at—at the lower end of the income spectrum late in the last expansion. it was the best labor market in 50 years, they told us. we saw that the biggest wage increases were going to people at the bottom end of the—of the wage spectrum for the last couple of years of that 10-year, 8-month expansion. so a tight labor market is probably the best thing that the fed can foster to—to go after that—that problem, which is a—a serious one. michelle smith. and now, nick timiraos. nick timiraos. yeah. [inaudible] journal. chair powell, you have described your asset purchase objective as stabilizing markets. and with markets having stabilized, aren’t the asset purchases now doing more than address market function by supporting your  macroeconomic objectives? the other question i have is, what is your strategy going to be with respect to using asset purchases to support your macroeconomic objectives going forward? thanks. chair powell. so you’re right, the asset purchases in—in their current size really sprang from severe dysfunction in the treasury and mbs markets at the beginning of the market reaction to the pandemic. and thanks to those purchases, we have substantially restored—not fully, but substantially restored functioning markets. this is absolutely critical. that market is really one of the—it’s part of the absolute bedrock of the global financial markets, and it’s—it’s essential that it—that it work well, and it is doing so now. and we’ve always said, though, that we understand, accept, and are fine with the fact that—that those purchases are also fostering a more accommodative stance of monetary policy, which would tend to support macroeconomic outcomes. so it’s doing both, and—and, you know, we’ve understood that for some time. it’s not—the programs are not structured exactly like the—the qe programs were in the last—in the last financial—in the aftermath of the last financial crisis. those were more focused on buying longer-run securities. the current purchases are all across the—the maturity spectrum. nonetheless, they are supporting accommodative financial conditions. i think it’s—it’s clear that that’s the case. in terms of our strategy, you know, that just remains to be seen. we—as you know, we’ve spent a lot of time in meetings this year looking at the tools that we have to adjust our current stance of policy. we do feel that our current monetary policy stance is the appropriate one. you know, we cut rates close to zero right at the beginning. we—we ramped up asset purchases, and those—those have really helped. and we gave forward guidance on—on both of those things, which the markets appear to understand, and market pricing is consistent with  those. so we think we’re—we think that our—our policy stance is a good one. we’re, of course, prepared to adjust that stance as appropriate and when we deem it as appropriate to—to better foster achievement of our goals, of course. michelle smith. okay. jeanna. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thank you for taking my question. you talked to larry fink at blackrock in march, april, and may, according to your public calendars. i was wondering if you could tell us a little bit about what you talked about, and, if the topic of those conversations was the corporate credit facilities, how did you handle potential conflicts of interest during those conversations? chair powell. well, so—so blackrock is just our agent. you know, we make the policy decisions in conjunction with our colleagues, and they just execute our—our plans. i actually don’t remember exactly what i would have been talking with him about, but he’s a—you know, he’s the head of a major service provider. he generally checks in to find out whether we’re okay with the quality of the service that—that blackrock is providing. i don’t have the daily face-to-face interaction with anybody else at blackrock or—or, as you can see, three phone calls in the course of a few months. it wasn’t very many. so i think, you know, their conflicts are managed extremely carefully in the contractual arrangements we have with them. and, again, i would have—i—i can’t recall exactly what those conversations were, but they were—they would have been about what are you seeing in the markets and things like that too—you know, generally exchanging information. and he’s—he’s typically trying to make sure that—that we are getting good service from the company that he founded and leads. that’s—i’d say that’s his main objective when we talk. michelle smith. okay, thank you. we’ll go to scott horsley.  scott horsley. thank you, mr. chairman. scott horsley from npr. i wonder if you can give us an update on the coin shortage that you talked to lawmakers about last month and what, if anything, that tells us about the, sort of, economic circulatory system. chair powell. yes. so—the situation with coins is that the—the quantity of coins is going up but was adequate before the pandemic. the problem is, the circulation kind of stopped because stores were closed, banks were closed. it just—customers weren’t spending, they were—so the coins stopped moving in the system. so we’ve been working for—ever since that began to happen, we saw it happening right away. we’ve been working to try to—try to reverse that disruption of the supply chain and restore normal circulation for our coins. so we’re working with the u.s. mint, which is the issuing authority, to address the issue. just last week, the mint—you may have seen—issued a statement asking for the public’s help in keeping coins circulating, and various people, you know, went and put their coins back into circulation. we also created a coin task force with all of the stakeholders—you know, banks and, you know, the armored carriers, the banking community, credit unions, everybody in the—in the coin supply chain. we’re in frequent communication with the banks and with the—with the armored carriers trying to get back to where we need to be. so we do think the inventories are building up. you know, the mint—the mint is making coins as fast as they can, but—but, you know, things happen with—in the factory environment: someone will come to work with covid—i think this has happened in—in almost every factory environment around the country—and then they’ll shut down for a day, and then they come back, and that kind of thing. so—so we’re closely monitoring it. it’s—you know, it’s a significant issue. we’ve—we’ve got a lot of resources on it, and we do feel like we’re—we’re making progress. michelle smith. okay, thank you. rachel siegel.  rachel siegel. hey, chair powell. thank you for taking my question. i’m wondering if you can be a bit more specific about any risks that you see related to a double-dip recession or signs that the recovery was stalling, or maybe begin to stalling, compared to some of the signs that we were seeing earlier in the summer. thanks very much. chair powell. yeah. so maybe i’ll talk more broadly about the—the outlook and include your—include your question in it. so, as i mentioned, economic activity and employment picked up beginning in may and right through june and remained well below their levels because, i’d say, job gains have reversed about a third of the job losses from march and april, and consumer spending has reversed about a half of the drop. so—but, nonetheless, those were—those were sooner and stronger than we expected. so—but what happened then was, along with that positive data, we got—we got the virus increases starting in the middle of june in lots and lots of states around the country. and that brings us to a new—a new point here, which is, we need to—in addition to dealing with the health crisis—we have to remember, this is really a health crisis, and these are people who are having the coronavirus, and it’s taking a terrible toll, so we’ve got to deal with the economic ramifications of that. so what we’re seeing is that we monitor quite a lot of what we—what we think of as sort of nonstandard, high-frequency data. that’s become a very important thing, even more important than usual in the work that we do. and what that data show, on balance, is that the pace of the recovery looks like it has slowed since the cases began that spike in june. so some measures of consumer spending based on credit card and debit card data have moved down. recent labor market indicators point to a slowing in job growth, particularly among smaller businesses. hotel occupancy rates have flattened out. people aren’t going out to restaurants, bars, gas stations, pharmacies, and beauty salons as much. consumer surveys, by the way,  which had dropped very sharply when the pandemic arrived and then moved back up sharply— they look like they may be softening again now. there are still some areas of strength. housing and motor vehicle sales have still been strong. nonetheless, on balance, it looks like the data are pointing to a slowing in the pace of the recovery. but i want to stress, it’s—it’s too early to say both how large that is and how sustained it will be. we just don’t know yet, because we have to wait for—to see the, you know, the actual data on spending and employment come in, and—but this—this is what we’re seeing, and, of course, we’re monitoring it very carefully. and i’d be remiss in not stressing this enough. the path of the economy is going to depend to a very high extent on the course of the virus and on the measures that we take to keep it in check. that is just a very fundamental fact about our economy right now. the two things are not in conflict. you know, social-distancing measures and fast reopening of the economy, they actually go together. they’re not in competition with each other. so— michelle smith. thank you. chris rugaber. christopher rugaber. hi. well, just to follow up on that a bit—and thanks for taking my question—you added the sentence into the statement about the course of the economy depends on the path of the virus. is this—do you feel this idea, or this view, is not widely enough understood? do you feel—you had warned back in may that too early reopening or an incautious reopening might harm the economy. do you feel that message was not heard, and that some of these reopenings took place perhaps sooner than they should have? chair powell. you know, i think we feel that it—it might be, the most central fact or the most central driver of the path of the economy right now is the virus. and you’re seeing that again now. you saw that in the—during the lockdown when we got cases way down, and  you saw the economy reopening, and you saw spending go up and hiring go up. and now that the—that the cases have spiked again—again, the early data, the high-frequency data suggest that there is a slower pace of growth, at least for now. we don’t know how deep or how long that will be. so it’s such an important sentence. we just decided that it needed to be in our—in our postmeeting statement. it’s so fundamental. and, you know, i think we can’t say it enough. it’s—it’s really important. we’re—you know, you can think of it as three stages. there’s the lockdown, and we know what that looks like, and we’ll get the data, i guess, later this week on gdp being down very historically large amounts. then there was the reopening, and we would expect that many, many people would go back to work. those whose jobs could be done without—you know, without exposure to lots of people in tight groups, they should have been—they should be able to go back to work during that phase fairly quickly. but that would depend on being able to keep the virus under control, which will depend on wearing masks and other social-distancing measures. so that’s where we are. it’s such an important factor. it’s—it’s in—we’re all talking about it, so we thought it really had to be in the statement. michelle smith. thank you. mike mckee. michael mckee. mr. chairman, i’m wondering what it is—you’ve talked a lot about using all of your tools, and governor brainard talked about moving from support to accommodation—what it is you can actually do. you’ve lowered rates to zero. you’ve set up the lending programs. there hasn’t been much take-up. and the tools you talk about are generally in service of keeping interest rates low, where they already are. so unless you were to go to negative interest rates, i’m wondering what additional accommodation the fed can bring.  or is it really up to the fiscal authorities at this point to rescue the economy, to—to add additional help for it? chair powell. right. so you’re right. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the u.s. economy at this difficult time, and we will always remain committed in that sense. we feel like we have ways to further support the economy certainly through our credit and liquidity facilities, which are effectively unlimited. we can adjust those programs. we also can adjust our forward guidance. we can adjust our asset purchases. so there are things that we can do. we—we feel like we have the ability to do more. but i would not disagree with the—with the importance of fiscal policy—with your statement about the importance of fiscal policy. fiscal policy can do—can address things that we can’t address. if there are particular groups that need help, that need direct monetary help— not a loan, but an actual grant as the ppp program showed—you can save a lot of businesses and a lot of jobs with those in a case where lending a company money might not be the right answer. the company might not want to take a loan out in order to pay workers who can’t work because there’s no business. so lending is a particular tool, and we’re using it very aggressively. but fiscal policy is essential here, and i would say, again, congress’s action early in the pandemic—historically large by any standard around the world, and certainly by u.s. standards—it’s really helping now. it’s really helping. it’s going to stand up very well to—to scrutiny down the years. this congress’s very fast and very open-handed response, i think, has really helped. and i think—i know that, as i’ve said, very likely more will be needed from— from all of us, and i see congress negotiating now over—over a new package, and i think that’s a good thing. michelle smith. okay. edward lawrence.  edward lawrence. thank you, mr. chairman, for taking the question. so you talked about it several times today: the fomc statement directly says the path of the economy is linked to the path of the virus. it looks like a vaccine might come this year, either in october or towards the end of the year. has the committee talked about how that might change fed policies? and, as a follow, do you see a vaccine helping inflation get back to where you want it to be? thank you. chair powell. so we—of course, the concept of vaccines comes up in our discussions. of course it does. but i have to say, you know, we’re—our job is not to plan for the upside case, right? the upside case—we’ve got that covered. our job is to plan for all—the full range of things that could happen. and so we’re assuming—we’re going to continue to assume that our facilities are needed, that our policies are needed, and that the public needs—you know, needs the support that we’re giving the public until—until shown otherwise. there’s great uncertainty around the development of therapeutics and vaccines. all of us want them to happen as soon as possible, but we can’t plan on that. we’ve got to hope for the worst—hope for the [laughs]—hope for the best and plan for the worst, i guess it goes. in terms of inflation, i don’t know. i mean, i—you know, i think, fundamentally, this is a disinflationary shock. i know there—there is a lot of discussion about how this might lead to inflation over time, but, you know, we’re—we’re seeing disinflationary pressures around the world going into this. now we see a big shock to demand, and we see core inflation dropping to 1 percent. and i do think for quite some time we’re going to be struggling against disinflationary pressures rather than against inflationary pressures. michelle smith. thank you. ann saphir.  ann saphir. hi. yes, thanks for taking my question. so, i mean, as you monitor the rising infections and the slowing pace of the recovery, could you speak to, what would the trigger be for doing further easing? and on the flip side of that, when would it be reasonable to expect the fed to consider raising rates again? thanks. chair powell. so, you know, as we’ve said, we’re carefully monitoring the situation. we moved very quickly and very aggressively early, and we’ve been monitoring the situation. and i think the markets and—and the economy—you know, i think our policy is in a good place. but we’ve looked at—at ways of adapting our policy as time goes by, and we’re ready to do that when we think it’s appropriate. i can’t give you a specific trigger. it really just is when we think it would help: would it help more than what we’re doing now to foster maximum employment and stable prices? sorry, your second question was? [inaudible] i can’t hear you. say it again? ann saphir. sorry—for when it would be reasonable for the fed to consider raising— chair powell. oh. ann saphir. —rates again. chair powell. so as i—as i said earlier, or a while back, we’re not even thinking about—thinking about raising rates. we’re—we’re totally focused on providing the economy the support that it will need. we think that the economy will need highly accommodative monetary policy and the use of our tools for an extended period. and we’re absolutely committed to staying in this until—until we’re very confident that that is no longer needed. so i wouldn’t look for us to be sending signals about cutting back on facilities or anything like that for a very long time. we’re—we’re in this until—until we’re well through it.  and i think this—you know, i think the picture is, you have the—you have the lockdown, then you have the reopening. but there’s probably going to be a long tail where a large number of people are struggling to get back to work because those—those heavily affected areas of the economy are going to be challenged, really, to employ the millions of people who are now out of work. i think 14 million people are now out of work who were working in february, something like that. so that’s going to take a while, i think, in everyone’s reckoning. and i just—everyone should know that we’re going to be there for all of that. michelle smith. thank you. catarina with bloomberg. catarina saraiva. hi, chair. thanks for taking our questions. you mentioned earlier that the labor market we had in february was the best we’ve had in 50 years, yet at that point the black unemployment rate was still double that of whites. so i wanted to ask you, you know, we’ve seen some economists and even the biden campaign call for the fed to more specifically target the gap between minority unemployment rates. even if you don’t get a mandate on this from congress, is it something you would consider more explicitly going forward? and how would you do that? and then i also wanted to ask you about former economist claudia sahm’s writings from last night. she gave a pretty harrowing account of her time at the fed—described harassment and professional gaslighting that others have also spoken to. is this your federal reserve? chair powell. okay. so, first, on the unemployment, you’re right. and we always point this out in our—in our remarks. while the aggregate unemployment rate was 3½ percent, every—every economy—every market in every economy has longer-run issues. and one of ours is just the disparate level of unemployment between—between blacks and whites. and it’s generally sort of twice as much—twice as high for blacks. so even—but this was the lowest,  you know, black unemployment rate in 50 years—or, actually, since we started keeping records, which was less than 50 years ago. so that’s just a fact, and it’s—it’s not a good fact, you know. so we have started, though, in recent years to focus considerable time and attention on disparate levels of unemployment—for example, among—among different racial groups and demographic groups. we regularly discuss those differences in our fomc discussions. we call them out in testimony and in speeches and in our monetary policy report to congress. you’ll see it everywhere, in all the things that we do. so what does that mean? i think—you know, i think what we learned is that a tight labor market really does a lot of good things for minorities and people at the lower end of the income spectrum generally. but it—you know, tight labor markets, it took 8 years—it took sort of the 8th and 9th and 10th years of that expansion to get to those benefits. so we need more than that. that’s not a good strategy, waiting 8, 9, 10 years to get there. so we’re—we’re going to get back there as fast as we can, because that’s what we can do, but society more broadly can affect these things. you know, we don’t really have tools that can address distributional, disparate outcomes as well as fiscal policy. and just policy generally—education, health care, all those things are much better at doing that. in terms of—so we do—you will see that—you will see that discussed—the black unemployment rate discussed all the time in what we do. and i think we clearly understand now that it’s something to weigh when you get a tight labor market. it’s something that you want to be focused on and weigh. so it is very much in our thinking—again, in a world where we don’t really have the best tools to address that. so, something that we’re doing. so i have not seen that—i did not see that blog post yet, although someone did mention it to me. we, of course, have been in meetings until just before this. so, but—and i will take a  look at it. i will do that. and, you know, i—without having had a chance to think about it, read it, understand it, i’ll just say a couple things. first, i think it’s fair to acknowledge that there’s been a lot of pain and injustice and unfair treatment that women have experienced in the workplace—not just among economists, but among economists and at the fed. that’s been going on for far too long. and, you know, like every other organization, the fed could have done more and—and should have done more. i would say, though, that we—you know, we have made it a very high priority to have as diverse and inclusive an organization as we can. and i think we’ve made a lot of progress on that. i think we want a place where it’s free to speak, where views are welcome, where people can disagree but must do so respectfully. i think a lot of organizations are coming around to understanding the importance of that. and i—my experience has been, you know, from my career in business too, is that organizations—the really successful organizations in our society get this. they do. they—mostly, they get it that if you want to attract the best people, this is what you—you’re going to attract the best people by having a diverse and inclusive workforce, so—and workplace. so we’ve made diversity a priority. we actually—you know, this has been a big issue for the economics profession. we had the—the two heads of the aea task force on this—who happen to be named ben bernanke and janet yellen—come here, and i cohosted a—an event with them, i guess, last year or the year before, which had several hundred—500 people or something like that listening in about—about these issues. so we’re doing a lot. i’m sure we can do more. we’re doing a lot to—you know, to foster a respectful climate—particularly for women, but for—for all people. so it’s—it’s a very high priority for us as an organization. i will look into—into that and—when i—you know, when this is over.  michelle smith. okay, thank you. don lee. don lee. chair powell, on the labor market, jobless claims rose again recently, and new hiring activity has weakened. i wonder, how big are the risks of the unemployment rate rising and job growth turning negative this summer? chair powell. so as i mentioned earlier, you know, we’re watching this high- frequency data. and, of course, the official labor market reports come out once a month, and no one has had a very good record lately of predicting what they’re going to say. they’ve been, in may and june, stronger than anybody expected, particularly in may. so i would say, some humility is appropriate here in terms of thinking we understand exactly where this is going. i think all we can say today is that there’s—there’s evidence in the high-frequency data, the surveys, and, you know, you’re tracking—you get pictures of spending. you get pictures of people’s movements. and what we—it looks like we’re seeing a slowdown in the rate of growth. that’s—and that might be—it might be short lived, it might not be, you know. and it seems to be related to—and the timing of it seems to be related to the spike in cases that began in the middle of june. now, i really don’t want to get ahead of where the data are on this. so we’re just going to have to see. we’re going to have to—the data over the next couple of months will answer that question. and recent experience suggests we—we need to wait and see. in any case, there’s clearly a risk that we’re going to see a slowdown in the rate of growth in economic activity and in hiring. it might still be at a robust level. honestly, we—we will not know until we start to see more data come in. michelle smith. thank you. victoria guida.  victoria guida. hi. victoria guida with politico. thanks for taking my question. i wanted to ask about the 13(3) facilities. you all have used your emergency authority to buy assets that you can’t directly buy, like corporate bonds, etfs. so i was just wondering, what is the scope of your authority under 13(3)? what type of assets are you allowed to buy? could you buy equities through an spv, for example? chair powell. you know, we haven’t—we haven’t looked at that, and we have no—no intention. we haven’t done any work or thought about buying equities. but, you know, we—we’re bound by the—by the provisions of 13(3), which requires that we make, you know, facilities—programs or facilities of broad applicability, meaning we have to have—it can’t just be focused on one entity. you know, it has to be a broad group of entities. there’s a lot in 13(3) about—about the solvency of the borrowers. you know, remember, it was rewritten or amended after the financial crisis, and it was written in a way that was—that was to—meant to make it challenging to bail out large financial institutions. that’s— there was a lot in there to make sure that, you know, that they were going to be solvent and things like that. so, you know, we have to meet those requirements. you know, we haven’t looked and said—tried to say, “what can we buy?” and, you know, “let’s make a complete list.” you know, we felt that, using these facilities, that we could buy corporate bonds and—and municipal bonds, too. so— victoria guida. so i just—sorry, just to follow up really quickly. so is it—is it generally supposed to be primarily directed at debt instruments, since you talked about borrowers? chair powell. the statute doesn’t say that, but, yeah, you could read the statute that way if you want. honestly, we haven’t tried to push it to, you know, what’s the theoretical limit  of it. i mean, i think, clearly, it’s—it’s supposed to—it’s supposed to replace lending, you know. that’s—that’s really what you’re doing. you’re stepping in to provide credit at times when the market has stopped functioning. that’s fundamentally what you’re doing with 13(3). and—and so i think you’ve got to—you’ve got to sort of work within that framework. michelle smith. thank you. greg robb. greg robb. hi. thanks for taking my question. greg robb from marketwatch. can you hear me? okay. one of the things in this crisis that’s unusual is that companies are cutting wages and salaries, and that’s something, you know, we haven’t seen much. and i was wondering what the fed is thinking about this. it—it seems to indicate that inflation could be more volatile in coming—coming months and coming years. chair powell. well, i—i think that the main thing that tells you is that the—the labor market has a long way to go to recover. you know, we had a good labor market. it wasn’t perfect. there were always issues. there are always going to be issues within an economy. but the labor market really has a long way to go now. even with two very strong months of job creation—7½ million jobs between the two months—we still have 14 million people unemployed. so it’s just—it’s a long way to go. and as—and that leads to a situation where there are so many people looking for jobs, and we have the economy only partially reopened. so there aren’t, you know—until the economy—or as the economy fully reopens, people can go back to work, but—so it’s a tough situation. and i’ve read reports of that. you know, of course, the reported wages went up because of the composition effect—you know, it’s low-paid workers didn’t go back to work, so—they were the ones that got laid off—so average hourly earnings went up. but clearly, clearly the pressure—there will not be much upward pressure on wages and compensation at the aggregate  level here in a world where there are just an awful lot of people looking for work. and the main—so it just underscores again the—the urgency of doing everything we can to restore the labor force and—and to support those who are—who want to be in the labor force but whose jobs have gone away for some period of time as they find other work due to this natural disaster. michelle smith. thank you. jean yung. jean yung. hi, chair powell. thank you very much. i wanted to ask about forward guidance. do you see merits to tying your asset purchases to economic outcomes? and would you consider both inflation and labor market conditions as part of those outcomes? and specifically, for the labor market, what conditions would you want to see before you think about pulling back stimulus? thank you. chair powell. so that’s a great discussion that we—we’ve talked about that at past meetings, and i imagine we will at future meetings and haven’t made any decisions yet on that. but, you know, you’ve got a couple ways to go. you can tie—you can tie them to dates. you can say we will—for a specific period of time, we will keep rates at x level. or you can say we’ll keep them there until you achieve a certain macroeconomic goal. and it can either be inflation or it could be an employment goal, as you pointed out. and i think that, you know, there’s attraction in all of those depending on the situation, i think, for obvious reasons. you can imagine situations where, you know, where you’d really want to be targeting macroeconomic outcomes. it’s also the case, though, that sometimes— sometimes date-based guidance works too. i think it really is very fact specific, and it’s not something we’ve—you know, we haven’t made any decisions on that, so i wouldn’t be standing here telling you we’re going to go this way or that way, you know, should the time come for us to—to change our forward guidance.  michelle smith. thank you. hannah. hannah lang. hi, chair powell. thanks for doing this today. i wanted to ask, on the stimulus bill that senate republicans are considering, they’ve said that they’re weighing whether to revise the collins amendment in order to ease the tier 1 leverage ratio for banks. are you concerned that doing so will deplete bank capital, given that the fed’s stress tests showed that, under the most severe scenarios for economic recovery, that several banks would approach the regulatory minimum capital requirements? chair powell. so—okay. so i think what the stress tests showed is that, under the “regular way” stress test, the banks passed. but right in the middle of the—of the stress test came the pandemic. and so we quickly dropped in three other scenarios, which were, you know, really bad scenarios. and many of the banks passed, but some didn’t. so we—and that was done very quickly. so we pivoted, and we used the provision that says we can—that says there’s been a material change, and we’re going to ask them to resubmit their capital plans. we also stopped buybacks—share buybacks and limited dividends. so we’re working through the details of how all of that will work. i think we’re going to—i think we’re going to send out the—the stress scenarios on september 30th. so, i would say, that’s—you know, that—that process is working that way. and—but you’re making a connection to it, to the collins amendment fix. so what’s going on there is that, like many other supervisors and regulators around the world, what we found is that our—we have found our banks are strong. they’re strongly capitalized, with lots of liquidity. and they’ve really been a source of strength in this—in this crisis so far. and they’ve written off bad loans and things like that. they’re still well capitalized and strong and will be, i think, a source of strength in this situation.  so—but what—what we did earlier was, we—what happens is, the banks run up against their leverage ratio, which is a non-risk-sensitive measure just of the amount of assets on the balance sheet. so people put cash in—on deposit at the banks, and they reached the limit of how—how much they could grow or made loans—you know, they—companies drew down loans and deposited cash. so we gave some leverage ratio relief earlier by temporarily—it’s temporary relief—by eliminating, temporarily, treasuries from the calculation of the—of the leverage ratio. this is a—this is another additional thing to do. if congress chooses to do this, we would want it to be explicitly temporary. we—in other words, this will not be a permanent change in capital standards. we haven’t decided to do it, but it would give us the ability to allow banks to grow their balance sheet and, in doing so, to serve their customers better. and, you know, i have to tell you, if you look around the world, bank regulators—many, many bank regulators around the world have given leverage ratio relief. you know, swiss national bank, the bank of japan, the european commission did, the bank of canada did, we did. it’s—it’s not, it’s not—what it’s doing is, it’s allowing them to grow their balance sheet in a way that serves their customers. that—that’s really what it’s doing. and, again, i would want it to be explicitly temporary if—if we do do it. michelle smith. okay, thank you. we’ll go to brian cheung for the last question. brian cheung. hi, chairman powell. thanks so much. brian cheung with yahoo finance. i wanted to ask just how the framework review is working in tandem with your discussion on explicit forward guidance. so is the idea that you’re trying to have some order to that, that you would announce the findings of the fed review before then committing to some sort of explicit forward guidance or even yield curve control policy? thanks.  chair powell. you know, so i do think that completion of the review would—first of all, it’s something that was a very high priority for—we were really looking forward to completing it, probably, at the june meeting, but it might have been the meeting before that. we were right on track, and then we got distracted. i—and we weren’t expecting the pandemic, of course. nobody was. so the pandemic came in. i think it is important to go back and finish that, and i do think that will inform, you know, everything we do going forward. i would also tell you, though, that, to—to a very large extent, the—the changes we’ll make to the statement of [on] longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy are really codifying the way we’re already acting with our policies. to a large extent, we’re already doing the things that are—that are in there. this is just a way of—of acknowledging that and putting them in the document. i can’t tell you what the exact timing of that will be, but i do think that’s a—that’s a sensible way to think about it. thanks very much. michelle smith. thank you very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 3  page 2 federal open market committee eric c. engstrom and christopher j. gust,3 deputy associate directors, division of monetary affairs, board of governors; luca guerrieri, deputy associate director, division of financial stability, board of governors; norman j. morin, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board of governors; jeffrey d. walker,4 deputy associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board of governors brian j. bonis and etienne gagnon,3 assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board of governors; viktors stebunovs, 5 assistant director, division of international finance, board of governors brett berger, 6 adviser, division of international finance, board of governors penelope a. beattie, 7 section chief, office of the secretary, board of governors; dana l. burnett, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board of governors david h. small, project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors michele cavallo and kurt f. lewis, principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board of governors marcelo ochoa, senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board of governors randall a. williams, senior information manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors james narron, first vice president, federal reserve bank of philadelphia david altig, kartik b. athreya, joseph w. gruber, daleep singh, and christopher j. waller, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of atlanta, richmond, kansas city, new york, and st. louis, respectively attended the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. 5 michael schetzel,6 senior vice president, federal reserve bank of new york eugene amromin, kathryn b. chen,6 matthew nemeth,6 joe peek, and patricia zobel, vice presidents, federal reserve banks of chicago, new york, new york, boston, and new york, respectively robert lerman,6 assistant vice president, federal reserve bank of new york karel mertens, senior economic policy advisor, federal reserve bank of dallas mark spiegel, senior policy advisor, federal reserve bank of san francisco review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices participants continued their discussion related to the ongoing review of the federal reserve’s monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. at this meeting, they discussed potential changes to the committee’s statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. participants agreed that, in light of fundamental changes in the economy over the past decade—including generally lower levels of interest rates and persistent disinflationary pressures in the united states and abroad—and given what has been learned during the monetary policy framework review, refining the statement could be helpful in increasing the transparency and accountability of monetary policy. such refinements could also facilitate well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, and, as a result, better position the committee to meet its maximum-employment and price-stability objectives. participants noted that the statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy serves as the foundation for the committee’s policy actions and that it would be important to finalize all changes to the statement in the near future. developments in financial markets and open market operations the system open market account (soma) manager turned first to a review of u.s. financial market developments. over the intermeeting period, overall financial conditions eased slightly. broad equity price indexes attended the discussion of developments in financial markets and open market operations. 7 attended tuesday’s session only. 6  minutes of the meeting of july 28–29, 2020 page 3 were roughly flat even as concerns about the resurgence in the coronavirus (covid-19) in the united states grew. at the same time, treasury yields and other sovereign yields declined, and the u.s. dollar weakened. overall, volatility remained subdued relative to recent periods. ket functioning indicators had returned to levels prevailing before the pandemic, and, as a result, purchases were conducted at the minimum pace directed by the committee. importantly, with conditions in mbs markets continuing to stabilize, primary mortgage rates fell to historically low levels over the intermeeting period. while the s&p 500 index was little changed, the effect of renewed outbreaks was evident in the differentiated performance across s&p industry sectors. virus-sensitive sectors and firms with weaker fundamentals underperformed over the period, as they had over the broader pandemic episode. airline and hotel share prices declined sharply, and share prices of banks—which faced earnings pressures from large loan loss provisions and compressed net interest margins—continued to underperform. as the soma manager highlighted, the s&p 500 index has been supported by its significant share of technology firms, many of which have been relatively resilient to virus containment measures. in contrast, smaller firms not well represented in the s&p 500 may be experiencing greater effects on their businesses due to the virus—a possibility consistent with the underperformance of the broader russell 2000 index over the intermeeting period. conditions in short-term dollar funding markets were also stable, with overnight rates close to the interest on excess reserves (ioer) rate. in broader dollar funding markets, term unsecured rates and foreign exchange swap spreads were also steady. federal reserve repurchase agreements (repos) outstanding fell from $185 billion to zero over the intermeeting period. with the timing of the overnight operations now having shifted to the afternoon when most trading activity in the repo market is complete and with minimum bid rates above the ioer rate, repo operations had been effectively positioned in a backstop role for the time being. as term u.s. dollar liquidity swaps matured, the amounts outstanding fell to around $120 billion, less than a third of the peak reached in late may. the market-implied path of the federal funds rate shifted down modestly over the intermeeting period. the corresponding path implied by responses to the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants also fell, as the probabilities placed on rate hikes next year and in 2022 declined. market pricing suggested that the federal funds rate was expected to first rise above the current target range in 2024. that timing was broadly consistent with survey respondents’ expectations regarding the timing of the first increase in the target range, although the range of survey responses was wide. the soma manager noted that survey responses suggested that the dispersion in views about the timing of a rate increase might be related to differing views about the economic conditions that would prevail when the fomc first lifted the target range, as survey respondents’ views about those conditions were also dispersed. the soma manager reported that market functioning across a number of market segments remained stable at significantly improved levels. in treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) markets, many mar8 the approved fima desk resolution, which updates the march 2020 resolution with a new expiration date, is available with other committee organizational documents at in light of improved conditions across these markets, the federal reserve’s balance sheet declined over the intermeeting period from $7.2 trillion to $7.0 trillion. the decline was driven by the reductions in repo and u.s. dollar liquidity swaps outstanding. these reductions more than offset ongoing purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs. the manager discussed a proposal to extend the temporary u.s. dollar liquidity swap arrangements as well as the temporary fima (foreign and international monetary authorities) repo facility through march of next year. keeping these arrangements in place would help sustain recent improvements in global dollar funding markets and support smooth functioning of the u.s. treasury market. under the proposal, provided that the committee had no objections, the chair would approve the extension of the temporary liquidity swap lines following the meeting. the extensions of the swap and fima repo arrangements would be announced following this meeting. by unanimous vote, the committee voted to approve a resolution that extended through march 31, 2021, the expiration of a temporary repo facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (fima repo facility). 8 .  page 4 federal open market committee secretary’s note: the chair subsequently provided approval to the desk, following the procedures in the authorization for foreign currency operations, to extend the expiration of the temporary u.s. dollar liquidity swap lines through march 31, 2021. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the coronavirus outbreak and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to have substantial effects on economic activity in the united states and abroad. the information available at the time of the july 28–29 meeting suggested that u.s. economic activity had picked up in may and june following sharp declines in march and april. measured on a quarterly basis, however, it appeared that real gross domestic product (gdp) had decreased at a historically rapid rate in the second quarter. labor market conditions improved considerably in june, but the improvements over may and june were modest relative to the substantial deterioration seen in march and april. consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce) through may—remained well below the rates that prevailed early in the year. total nonfarm payroll employment expanded robustly in june, as it did in may, but the gains in those two months offset only about one-third of the jobs lost in march and april. the unemployment rate moved down further to 11.1 percent, but it continued to be far above its level at the beginning of the year. the unemployment rates for african americans, asians, and hispanics declined, on balance, over the past two months but remained well above the national average. both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio increased further in june. initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits continued to decrease, on net, through the middle of july, but the pace of declines had slowed in recent weeks. in addition, weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by the board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp, along with some other high-frequency measures—such as employment at small businesses and job postings—suggested that employment gains had slowed since mid-june but likely were still strong. total pce price inflation was 0.5 percent over the 12 months ending in may, reflecting both weak aggregate demand and a considerable drop in consumer energy prices. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.0 percent over the same 12-month period. in contrast, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 2.0 percent in may. the consumer price index (cpi) increased 0.6 percent over the 12 months ending in june, while core cpi inflation was 1.2 percent over the same period. on a monthly basis, the available data indicated that consumer prices—as measured by the pce price index in may and the cpi in june—had turned up after having fallen in march and april; this rebound was evident in many price categories that were most affected by social-distancing measures. recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. the university of michigan surveys of consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years was unchanged, on net, from may to early july; the three-year-ahead measure from the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations edged down in june but remained within its recent range. real pce rebounded robustly in may, with particularly strong growth in spending for consumer goods but more moderate gains in expenditures for consumer services. in june, the components of retail sales used by the bureau of economic analysis to estimate pce, along with light motor vehicle sales, increased further. overall, however, real consumer spending remained well below the levels that prevailed at the beginning of the year. moreover, recent high-frequency indicators of spending on many consumer services—such as restaurant dining, hotel accommodations, and air travel—remained very subdued. real disposable personal income fell back in may, primarily reflecting the waning of the substantial boost that federal stimulus payments had provided in april. however, wage and salary income increased strongly in may, though to a level still below its february value, and unemployment insurance benefits continued to be substantial, leaving the personal saving rate quite elevated. the consumer sentiment measures from both the michigan survey and the conference board survey improved notably in june but fell back somewhat in july. housing-sector activity bounced back strongly in recent months, likely boosted in part by the effects of low interest rates. starts and building permit issuance for single-family homes, along with starts of multifamily units, increased significantly over may and june; however,  minutes of the meeting of july 28–29, 2020 page 5 these construction measures were still below their prepandemic levels. sales of existing homes rose substantially over those two months, and new home sales also moved up on net. indicators of business fixed investment suggested that investment had generally not begun to recover but that the pace of declines had moderated, on balance, in recent months. nominal new orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased in may and june, but they remained below their levels at the beginning of the year, while some measures of business sentiment improved. nominal business spending on nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector declined further in may, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending on structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to decrease through late july. industrial production expanded briskly in may and june, as many factories reopened or ramped up production. the surge in manufacturing production was led by appreciable gains in the output of motor vehicles and related parts following extended automaker shutdowns from mid-march through april. in contrast, output in the mining sector—which includes crude oil extraction—decreased further, reflecting the effects of stilllow crude oil prices. total real government purchases appeared to have increased moderately, on balance, in the second quarter. federal defense spending continued to rise through june, and nondefense purchases were likely boosted in the second quarter by fiscal policy measures taken in response to the coronavirus. in contrast, state and local purchases looked to have declined markedly, as the payrolls of these governments shrank further in june, and nominal state and local construction expenditures decreased, on net, over april and may. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit widened in may relative to april, as exports decreased more than imports. the fall in exports was broad based across goods categories, while lower imports of automotive products more than offset higher imports of consumer goods and industrial supplies. following april’s historic plunge, exports and imports of services fell a bit further in may, driven by the continued suspension of most international travel. preliminary data for june showed some recovery in nominal goods exports and imports. altogether, the available data suggested that net exports were a significant drag on the rate of change in real gdp in the second quarter. incoming data suggested that foreign economic activity plunged in the second quarter as a result of the coronavirus pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain it. there were also signs that many foreign economies started to recover over the past few months as restrictions were gradually eased. in china, where economic activity had collapsed in the first quarter and restrictions were rolled back earlier than elsewhere, the preliminary gdp release showed that the economy bounced back strongly in the second quarter. in the euro area and other advanced foreign economies, recent data on industrial production and, to a lesser extent, consumer spending showed a partial recovery in may and june. however, continued uncertainty about the course of the virus was underscored by the fact that some emerging market economies were struggling to control the pandemic, while some other countries that previously contained the virus were experiencing flare-ups of new infections. inflation rates continued to fall in most foreign economies through june because of low energy prices and weak demand, and measures of inflation expectations remained subdued. staff review of the financial situation amid sizable fluctuations, changes in asset prices over the intermeeting period were mixed on net. financial market sentiment was boosted by better-than-expected economic data for the united states, china, and europe. however, the boost to sentiment appeared to have been offset by concerns about the domestic spread of the coronavirus and its uncertain effects on the future course of the economy. on balance, broad equity price indexes were roughly unchanged, treasury yields declined and the yield curve flattened, corporate and municipal bond spreads narrowed, and the dollar weakened somewhat. liquidity conditions continued to normalize but had not returned to their pre-pandemic levels in several markets. over the intermeeting period, yields on nominal treasury securities fell and the yield curve flattened on net. yields declined somewhat at the start of the intermeeting period following the more-accommodative-than-expected june fomc communications. the further decline in yields that occurred over subsequent weeks likely reflected concerns about the surge in confirmed coronavirus cases across many parts of the united states. measures of inflation compensation based on treasury inflation protected securities maturing over the next few years continued to rebound from their sharp drop in mid-march. the rebound was reportedly driven primarily by investors’ interpretation of recent economic data, which suggested that the risk of deflation had abated  page 6 federal open market committee somewhat, as well as by some improvement in market liquidity. despite the uptick, both the 5-year and 10-year measures of inflation compensation remained below their pre-pandemic levels. the expected path of the federal funds rate based on a straight read of overnight index swap quotes declined modestly and stayed close to the effective lower bound at least through the first half of 2024. market-implied forward rates referring to 2021 and 2022 remained slightly negative; however, market commentary suggested that investors generally did not expect the fomc to lower the federal funds target range below zero. broad stock price indexes fluctuated substantially, largely in reaction to news about the pandemic and economic activity, and ended the intermeeting period roughly unchanged. technology stocks continued to outperform the broader market, whereas equity prices in the bank and energy sectors fell notably over the period. one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500 index—the vix—rose markedly earlier in the period but subsequently declined and ended the period lower. equity market volatility remained elevated relative to its normal range over the past several years. spreads of investment- and speculative-grade corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity treasury yields narrowed somewhat and had retraced most of their pandemic-related surge. conditions in short-term funding markets were generally stable over the intermeeting period. spreads for negotiable certificates of deposit and most types of commercial paper were little changed, on net, and spreads and issuance volumes for both types of instruments reached pre-pandemic levels. in light of the stable market conditions, there was little activity in the emergency liquidity facilities. since the june fomc meeting, assets under management for prime money market funds (mmfs) were little changed, whereas government mmfs experienced moderate outflows. amid heavy issuance of securities by the treasury, government mmfs continued to increase their holdings of treasury securities while reducing their holdings of repos. the effective federal funds rate (effr) and secured overnight financing rate (sofr) increased, on average, 4 basis points and 5 basis points, respectively, from the previous intermeeting period. the effr fluctuated between 8 and 10 basis points, and the sofr fluctuated between 7 and 13 basis points, throughout the intermeeting period. the decline in total outstanding federal reserve repo operations from $185 billion to zero largely reflected an increase in minimum bid rates at the federal reserve’s overnight and term repo operations. over the intermeeting period, the federal reserve maintained the purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs at the pace prevailing at the end of the previous intermeeting period. risk sentiment abroad fluctuated over the intermeeting period as market participants weighed increasing coronavirus cases in a number of countries against improving economic data releases and ongoing fiscal and monetary policy support. foreign equity prices generally declined on net. a resurgence of geopolitical tensions between the united states and china weighed on investor sentiment late in the period and prompted a partial retracement of earlier gains for the shanghai composite index. long-term sovereign yields in most advanced foreign economies (afes) ended the period moderately lower. the yield spreads of long-term italian bonds over their german counterparts narrowed further, reaching the lowest level since march following agreement on the european union (eu) recovery fund. the staff’s broad dollar index declined slightly, on net, with moderate depreciation against afe currencies. the eu recovery fund agreement supported the euro, which appreciated about 3 percent against the dollar over the intermeeting period. in contrast, the brazilian real depreciated about 5 percent against the dollar, amid continued policy rate cuts by the central bank of brazil, escalating coronavirus cases, and political turmoil in brazil. capital market financing conditions for nonfinancial firms eased somewhat further over the intermeeting period, with yields on corporate bonds remaining near historical lows. investment-grade corporate bond issuance was solid in june, and speculative-grade issuance remained robust. gross institutional leveraged loan issuance picked up in june from its subdued levels in previous months. gross equity issuance hit a record level in june, as the volume of seasoned equity offerings reached a new record, while initial public offerings rebounded from their very low levels of the previous three months. in the july senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported a notable tightening of lending standards on commercial and industrial (c&i) loans to firms of all sizes in the second quarter. standards were reported to be at the tighter end of their range since 2005, a marked change from a year ago. c&i loans on banks’ balance sheets contracted significantly in june, reflecting paydowns of the record draws on credit lines seen in previous months, as well as low originations.  minutes of the meeting of july 28–29, 2020 page 7 credit quality of nonfinancial corporations deteriorated further over the intermeeting period, with a sizable volume of speculative-grade debt downgraded in june. defaults in may reached their highest single-month volume since 2009, and june defaults were high as well. market indicators of future default expectations also deteriorated somewhat. municipal market financing conditions remained accommodative, although the credit quality of municipal debt continued to show signs of weakness. financing conditions for small businesses remained tight. banks reported in the july sloos that the level of standards for small businesses was at the tighter end of the range since 2005. at the same time, the credit needs of small businesses remained high, as the prospect arose of many businesses having to shut down operations again in response to rising coronavirus cases. small business loan performance deteriorated significantly; short-term delinquencies were comparable with levels seen in early 2008. amid tighter lending standards and high credit demand, advances via the paycheck protection program lending facility continued to grow over the intermeeting period. in early july, the main street lending program became fully operational. financing conditions for commercial real estate (cre), particularly those in capital markets, recovered further over the intermeeting period. spreads on non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) continued to decline in june, while issuance of non-agency cmbs continued to show signs of moderate recovery in may and june. spreads on agency cmbs remained at pre-pandemic levels, and agency cmbs issuance was strong. in contrast, bank lending standards for cre loans tightened further, according to the july sloos, and cre loan growth at banks slowed. the credit quality of existing cre loans continued to deteriorate as further signs of repayment difficulties emerged, most notably in the lodging and retail sectors. financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were generally unchanged over the intermeeting period. the spread between the primary mortgage rate and mbs yields remained wide, reflecting capacity constraints at loan originators, increased origination costs, and decreases in the value of servicing rights. credit continued to flow to borrowers with higher credit scores seeking mortgages that met standard conforming loan criteria, and low mortgage interest rates supported elevated refinancing activity. financing conditions remained tight, however, for borrowers with relatively low credit scores and for those seeking nonconforming mortgages. the july sloos and other surveys of mortgage market conditions suggested that both bank and nonbank lenders tightened standards in the second quarter. the credit quality of mortgages did not appear to deteriorate further over the period. financing conditions for consumer credit tightened a bit further during the intermeeting period. in the credit card market, lending standards at commercial banks tightened further according to the july sloos. in contrast, conditions in the auto loan market appeared to be little changed, on balance, with those for subprime borrowers remaining tight. conditions in the consumer asset-backed securities (abs) markets were stable during the intermeeting period. yield spreads for certain highly rated credit card and auto loan abs stabilized at prepandemic levels, while student and auto loan abs issuance recovered to a pre-pandemic pace. consumer credit quality remained stable, partly due to forbearance programs. the staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system, and, on balance, characterized the financial vulnerabilities of the u.s. financial system as notable, while noting an unusually high level of uncertainty associated with this assessment. the staff judged that asset valuation pressures were notable. in particular, high-yield and investment-grade corporate bond spreads were within historical norms, and commercial real estate prices were continuing to increase despite rising vacancy rates. the staff assessed vulnerabilities due to nonfinancial leverage to have risen from moderate to notable, reflecting declines in household incomes and business profits; such declines implied less resilient borrowers. the expected sharp decline in second-quarter real gdp would likely result in a rise in the ratio of household debt to nominal gdp. the ratio of business debt to nominal gdp rose in the first quarter from levels that were already historically high—amid declining profits and deteriorating credit quality—although low interest rates had helped ease firms’ debt servicing burdens. the staff assessed vulnerabilities arising from financial leverage to have increased from low to moderate, citing uncertainty about losses connected to business loans for banks and a higher weight on vulnerabilities connected to leverage at nonbank financial institutions. vulnerabilities associated with maturity and liquidity transformation were characterized as moderate, and the staff noted that federal reserve facilities reduced these vulnerabilities at nonbanks.  page 8 federal open market committee staff economic outlook in the u.s. economic projection prepared by the staff for the july fomc meeting, the estimated level of real gdp in the second quarter was marked up compared with the june meeting forecast, reflecting the betterthan-expected data through june. nevertheless, economic activity still appeared to have declined at a historically rapid rate in the second quarter. the projected rate of recovery in real gdp, and the pace of declines in the unemployment rate, over the second half of this year were expected to be somewhat less robust than in the previous forecast. although the staff assumed that additional fiscal stimulus measures would be enacted beyond those anticipated in the june forecast, the positive effect on the economic outlook was outweighed somewhat by the staff’s assessment of the likely effects of several other factors. those factors included the increasing spread of the coronavirus in the united states since midjune; the reactions of many states and localities in slowing or scaling back the reopening of their economies, especially for businesses, such as restaurants and bars, providing services that entail personal interactions; and some high-frequency indicators that pointed to a deceleration in economic activity. substantial fiscal policy measures—both enacted and anticipated—along with appreciable support from monetary policy and the federal reserve’s liquidity and lending facilities were expected to continue bolstering the economic recovery, although a complete recovery was not expected by yearend. inflation was projected to remain subdued this year, reflecting the substantial amount of slack in resource utilization and the sizable declines in consumer energy prices earlier this year. the staff’s baseline assumptions were that the current restrictions on social interactions and business operations, along with voluntary social distancing by individuals, would ease gradually through next year. as a result, the rate of real gdp growth was projected to exceed potential output growth, the unemployment rate was expected to decline considerably, and inflation was forecast to pick back up over 2021 and 2022. the staff continued to observe that the uncertainty related to the economic effects of the pandemic was extremely elevated and that the unusual nature of the pandemic-related shock made assessments about how the economy might evolve in the future more challenging than usual. in light of the significant uncertainty and downside risks associated with the course of the pandemic and how long it would take the economy to recover, the staff still judged that a more pessimistic projection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast. in this alternative scenario, an acceleration of the coronavirus outbreak, with another round of strict limitations on social interactions and business operations, was assumed to begin later this year, leading to a decrease in real gdp, a jump in the unemployment rate, and renewed downward pressure on inflation next year. compared with the baseline, the disruption to economic activity was more severe and protracted in this scenario, with real gdp and inflation lower and the unemployment rate higher by the end of the medium-term projection. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook participants noted that the coronavirus pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. following sharp declines, economic activity and employment had picked up somewhat in recent months but remained well below levels at the beginning of the year. weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions had improved in recent months, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend on the course of the virus, which was seen as highly uncertain. participants noted that the rebound in consumer spending from its trough in april had been particularly strong. resumption in economic activity, as well as payments to households under the coronavirus aid, relief, and economic security (cares) act, had supported household income and consumer expenditures. participants observed that with this rebound, household spending likely had recovered about half of its previous decline. consumers’ purchases of goods—including motor vehicles, other durables, and especially goods sold online—had bounced back much more than their purchases of services, such as air travel, hotel accommodations, and restaurant meals, which were disrupted significantly by social distancing and other effects of the virus. with regard to the behavior of household spending in recent weeks, participants pointed to information from district contacts and high-frequency indicators (such as credit and debit card transactions and mobility indicators based on cellphone location tracking) as suggesting that increases in some consumer expenditures had likely slowed in reaction to the further spread of the virus. participants noted that households’ spending on discre-  minutes of the meeting of july 28–29, 2020 page 9 tionary services—such as leisure, travel, and hospitality—would likely be subdued for some time and thus would be a factor restraining the pace of recovery. turn, such a reopening would depend in large part on the efficacy of health measures taken to limit the spread of the virus. in contrast to the sizable rebound in consumer spending, participants saw less improvement in the business sector in recent months, and they noted that their district business contacts continued to report extraordinarily high levels of uncertainty and risks. several participants relayed examples of some operational difficulties their business contacts were reportedly facing in the current environment. these difficulties included managing disruptions in supply chains, challenges associated with closure and reopening, and elevated employee absenteeism in some cases. furthermore, some participants noted that small businesses were under significant strain. also, further near-term fiscal support was uncertain. participants noted that, in light of conditions in the business sector, business investment spending continued to be subdued. participants generally agreed that actions of consumers and businesses in taking steps to slow the spread of the virus, along with developments in public health, would be critical in ensuring a durable reopening of businesses. in addition, monetary policy and particularly fiscal policy would also play important roles in supporting business activity. participants also discussed the nature of the current situation in the labor market. they noted that the downturn in employment was concentrated among lowerwage and service-sector workers, many of whom were employed in industries most adversely affected by socialdistancing measures. and with lower-wage and servicesector jobs disproportionately held by african americans, hispanics, and women, these portions of the population were bearing a disproportionate share of the economic hardship caused by the pandemic. participants noted that the fiscal support initiated in the spring through the cares act had been very important in granting some financial relief to millions of families. a number of participants observed that, with some provisions of the cares act set to expire shortly against the backdrop of a still-weak labor market, additional fiscal aid would likely be important for supporting vulnerable families, and thus the economy more broadly, in the period ahead. several participants also commented on ongoing challenges facing the energy or farm sector despite recent improvements. in the energy sector, these challenges included still-low oil demand, excess inventories, and low oil prices, while in the farm sector they included low prices of some farm commodities, pandemic-related disruptions in some food processing plants, and a significant decline in demand for ethanol. regarding the labor market, many participants commented that the pace of employment gains, which was quite strong in may and june, had likely slowed. the increasing number of virus cases in many parts of the country had led to delays in some business reopenings and to some reclosures as well. the pace of declines in initial unemployment insurance claims had slowed in recent weeks, and claims remained at an elevated level. in addition, participants emphasized that the labor market was a long way from a full recovery even after the positive may and june employment reports; these reports indicated that, through june, only about one-third of the roughly 22 million loss in jobs that occurred over march and april had been offset by subsequent gains. participants generally agreed that prospects for further substantial improvement in the labor market would depend on a broad and sustained reopening of businesses. in in their comments about inflation, participants generally judged that the negative effect of the pandemic on aggregate demand was more than offsetting upward pressures on some prices stemming from supply constraints or from higher demand for certain products, so that the overall effect of the pandemic on prices was seen as disinflationary. recent low monthly readings of pce prices suggested that the 12-month change measure of pce price inflation would likely continue to run well below the committee’s 2 percent objective for some time. against this backdrop, a few participants noted a risk that longer-term inflation expectations might move below levels consistent with the committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. participants also noted that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy would likely be needed for some time to support aggregate demand and achieve 2 percent inflation over the longer run. participants observed that many measures of financial market functioning were indicating that improvements achieved since the extreme turbulence in march had been sustained. actions by the federal reserve, including emergency lending facilities established with approval of (and, in many cases, financial support from) the treasury, had helped ease the strains in some financial markets seen earlier in the year and were supporting the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities. participants observed that the volume of bor-  page 10 federal open market committee rowing in recent months at many of the federal reserve’s liquidity facilities had stayed low, reflecting improved availability of funding from market sources. and participants agreed that the federal reserve’s ongoing provision of backstop credit in various forms continued to be important to sustain the market improvements already achieved. participants observed that uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook remained very elevated, with the path of the economy highly dependent on the course of the virus and the public sector’s response to it. several risks to the outlook were noted, including the possibility that additional waves of virus outbreaks could result in extended economic disruptions and a protracted period of reduced economic activity. in such scenarios, banks and other lenders could tighten conditions in credit markets appreciably and restrain the availability of credit to households and businesses. other risks cited included the possibility that fiscal support for households, businesses, and state and local governments might not provide sufficient relief of financial strains in these sectors and that some foreign economies could come under greater pressure than anticipated as a result of the spread of the pandemic abroad. several participants noted potential longer-run effects of the pandemic associated with possible restructuring in some sectors of the economy that could slow the growth of the economy’s productive capacity for some time. a number of participants commented on various potential risks to financial stability. banks and other financial institutions could come under significant stress, particularly if one of the more adverse scenarios regarding the spread of the virus and its effects on economic activity was realized. nonfinancial corporations had carried high levels of indebtedness into the pandemic, increasing their risk of insolvency. there were also concerns that the anticipated increase in treasury debt over the next few years could have implications for market functioning. there was general agreement that these institutions, activities, and markets should be monitored closely, and a few participants noted that improved data would be helpful for doing so. several participants observed that the federal reserve had recently taken steps to help ensure that banks remain resilient through the pandemic, including by conducting additional sensitivity analysis in conjunction with the most recent bank stress tests and imposing temporary restrictions on shareholder payouts to preserve banks’ capital. a couple of participants noted that they believed that restrictions on shareholder payouts should be extended, while another judged that such a step would be premature. in their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed their commitment to using the federal reserve’s full range of tools to support the u.s. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. they noted that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. in light of this assessment, all participants considered it appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. furthermore, participants continued to judge that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until they were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. participants also judged that, in order to continue to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, it would be appropriate over coming months for the federal reserve to increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency residential mortgage-backed securities (rmbs) and cmbs at least at the current pace. these actions would be helpful in sustaining smooth market functioning, thereby fostering the effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. in addition, participants noted that it was appropriate that the desk would continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. participants observed that it would be important to continue to monitor developments closely and that the committee would be prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate. participants discussed the current stance of monetary policy and the circumstances under which they might increase monetary policy accommodation or clarify their intentions regarding policy. participants generally judged that the committee’s policy actions over the past several months had provided substantial accommodation; several of them observed that the committee’s asset purchases, which were designed to support financial market functioning and the smooth flow of credit, were likely also providing a degree of policy accommodation. noting the increase in uncertainty about the economic outlook over the intermeeting period, several participants suggested that additional accommodation could be required to promote economic recovery and return inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective. some participants observed that, due to the nature of the shock that the u.s. economy was experiencing, strong  minutes of the meeting of july 28–29, 2020 page 11 fiscal policy support would be necessary to encourage expeditious improvements in labor market conditions. with regard to the outlook for monetary policy beyond this meeting, a number of participants noted that providing greater clarity regarding the likely path of the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate at some point. concerning the possible form that revised policy communications might take, these participants commented on outcome-based forward guidance—under which the committee would undertake to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate at least until one or more specified economic outcomes was achieved—and also touched on calendar-based forward guidance—under which the current target range would be maintained at least until a particular calendar date. in the context of outcome-based forward guidance, various participants mentioned using thresholds calibrated to inflation outcomes, unemployment rate outcomes, or combinations of the two, as well as combinations with calendar-based guidance. in addition, many participants commented that it might become appropriate to frame communications regarding the committee’s ongoing asset purchases more in terms of their role in fostering accommodative financial conditions and supporting economic recovery. more broadly, in discussing the policy outlook, a number of participants observed that completing a revised statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy would be very helpful in providing an overarching framework that would help guide the committee’s future policy actions and communications. a majority of participants commented on yield caps and targets—approaches that cap or target interest rates along the yield curve—as a monetary policy tool. of those participants who discussed this option, most judged that yield caps and targets would likely provide only modest benefits in the current environment, as the committee’s forward guidance regarding the path of the federal funds rate already appeared highly credible and longer-term interest rates were already low. many of these participants also pointed to potential costs associated with yield caps and targets. among these costs, participants noted the possibility of an excessively rapid expansion of the balance sheet and difficulties in the design and communication of the conditions under which such a policy would be terminated, especially in conjunction with forward guidance regarding the policy rate. in light of these concerns, many participants judged that yield caps and targets were not warranted in the current environment but should remain an option that the committee could reassess in the future if circumstances changed markedly. a couple of participants remarked on the value of yield caps and targets as a means of reinforcing forward guidance on asset purchases, thereby providing insurance against adverse movements in market expectations regarding the path of monetary policy, and as a tool that could help limit the amount of asset purchases that the committee would need to make in pursuing its dual-mandate goals. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the coronavirus outbreak was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. following sharp declines, economic activity and employment had picked up somewhat in recent months but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year. consumer price inflation was being held down by weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices. overall financial conditions had improved, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households, businesses, and communities. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. members stated that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus. in addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis would weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and was posing considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. in light of these developments, members decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. members stated that they expected to maintain this target range until they were confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. members agreed that they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook—including information related to public health—as well as global developments and muted inflation pressures, and that they would use the committee’s tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, members noted that they would assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to the committee’s maximum-employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. this assessment would take into account a wide range of  page 12 federal open market committee information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, members agreed that over coming months it would be appropriate for the federal reserve to increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency rmbs and cmbs at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. in addition, members agreed that the desk would continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repo operations. members noted that they would closely monitor developments and be prepared to adjust their plans as appropriate. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective july 30, 2020, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • • • • • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs), and agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) at least at the current pace to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs and all principal payments from holdings of agency cmbs in agency cmbs. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. the coronavirus outbreak is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. following sharp declines, economic activity and employment have picked up somewhat in recent months but remain well below their levels at the beginning of the year. weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices are holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions have improved in recent months, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy will depend significantly on the course of the virus. the ongoing public health crisis will weigh heavily on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. in light of these developments, the committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. the committee expects to maintain this target range until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook, including information related to public health, as well as global developments and muted inflation pressures, and will use its tools and act as appropriate to support  minutes of the meeting of july 28–29, 2020 page 13 the economy. in determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, the committee will assess realized and expected economic conditions relative to its maximum employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective. this assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. to support the flow of credit to households and businesses, over coming months the federal reserve will increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions. in addition, the open market desk will continue to offer large-scale overnight and term repurchase agreement operations. the committee will closely monitor developments and is prepared to adjust its plans as appropriate.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, patrick harker, robert s. kaplan, neel kashkari, loretta j. mester, and randal k. quarles. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective july 30, 2020. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, september 15–16, 2020. the meeting adjourned at 10:55 a.m. on july 29, 2020. notation vote by notation vote completed on june 30, 2020, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on june 9–10, 2020.  james a. clouse secretary 
nce september 16, 2020 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us—maximum employment and price stability. since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide some relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. today my colleagues on the federal open market committee and i made some important changes to our policy statement, including an update to our guidance for the likely path of our policy interest rate. guided by our new statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy that we announced a few weeks ago, these changes clarify our strong commitment over a longer time horizon. before describing today’s policy actions, let me briefly review recent economic developments. economic activity has picked up from its depressed second-quarter level, when much of the economy was shut down to stem the spread of the virus. with the reopening of many businesses and factories and fewer people withdrawing from social interactions, household spending looks to have recovered about three-quarters of its earlier decline. nonetheless, spending on services that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality, is still quite weak. the recovery in household spending also likely owes to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided substantial and timely support to household incomes. activity in the housing sector has returned to its level at the beginning of the year, and we are starting to see signs of an improvement in business investment. the recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, and forecasts from fomc participants for economic growth this year have been revised up since our june summary of  economic projections. even so, overall activity remains well below its level before the pandemic and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. in the labor market, roughly half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in march and april have been regained as many people returned to work. the unemployment rate declined over the past four months but remains elevated at 8.4 percent as of august. although we welcome this progress, we will not lose sight of the millions of americans who remain out of work. looking ahead, fomc participants project the unemployment rate to continue to decline; the median projection is 7.6 percent at the end of this year, 5.5 percent next year, and 4 percent by 2023. the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. in particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the services sector, for women, and for african americans and hispanics. the economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. the pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. for some goods, including food, supply constraints have led to notably higher prices, adding to the burden for those struggling with lost income. more broadly, however, weaker demand, especially in sectors that have been most affected by the pandemic, has held down consumer prices, and overall, inflation is running well below our 2 percent longer-run objective. the median inflation projection from fomc participants rises from 1.2 percent this year to 1.7 percent next year and reaches 2 percent in 2023. as the economy began its recovery, covid-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths also rose. the reimposition of some social-distancing restrictions as well as more cautious behavior by many individuals have succeeded in slowing the spread of the virus. as we have emphasized  throughout the pandemic, the outlook for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on our success in keeping the virus in check. all of us have a role to play in our nation’s response to the pandemic. following the advice of public health professionals to keep appropriate social distances and to wear masks in public will help get the economy back to full strength. a full economic recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it is safe to reengage in a broad range of activities. the path forward will also depend on the policy actions taken across all parts of the government to provide relief and to support the recovery for as long as needed. the federal reserve’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. we remain committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy in this challenging time. the changes we made in today’s policy statement reflect our strategy to achieve our dual- mandate goals by seeking to eliminate shortfalls from maximum employment and achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, as we articulated in our statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. we view maximum employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal and do not see a high level of employment as posing a policy concern unless accompanied by signs of unwanted increases in inflation or the emergence of other risks that could impede the attainment of our goals. and we believe that achieving inflation that averages 2 percent over time helps ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at our longer-run 2 percent objective. in turn, well-anchored inflation expectations enhance our ability to meet both our employment and inflation objectives, particularly in the new normal in which interest rates are closer to their effective lower bound even in good times.  hence, as we say in our statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we “will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent.” we expect “to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes”—including maximum employment—“are achieved.” with regard to interest rates, we now indicate that we expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate “until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time.” in addition, over coming months we will continue to increase our “holdings of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace.” these asset purchases are intended “to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses.” we believe the strong policy guidance we are providing today will serve the economy well by promoting our goals through the many possible paths the recovery may take. of course, as we note in our policy statement, we “would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of our [the committee’s] goals.” the federal reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. preserving the flow of credit is essential for mitigating the damage to the economy and promoting a robust recovery. many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the treasury department and are available only in  very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. these programs serve as a backstop to key credit markets and appear to have restored the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. we have deployed these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled, in large part, by financial backing and support from congress and the treasury. when the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the toolbox. as i have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. the fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. we can only create programs or facilities with broad-based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. many borrowers are benefiting from these programs, as is the overall economy. but for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. in these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. the fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe in our lifetimes. it will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of this year, and it may take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that. we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible.  finally, i would like to take a moment to recognize the passing of our friend and colleague, thomas laubach. his outstanding analysis and advice have been indispensable to the fomc and have played a key role in the policy decisions that will define this era of the federal reserve. he will be remembered for his intellect, but also his kindness, his equanimity, and his dedication to achieving our mission on behalf of the american people. we will miss him. thank you. i’ll now be glad to take your questions. michelle smith. thank you. nick timiraos. nick timiraos. good afternoon, chair powell. nick timiraos from the wall street journal. you’ve been very clear about the committee’s intention on rates, not even thinking about thinking about raising rates, and today showing low rates even as unemployment falls to 4 percent and inflation rises to 2 percent. my question is about asset purchases. does the guidance today apply to the current asset purchase pace? are there any macroeconomic conditions under which you would favor increasing the monthly pace of treasury and mbs purchases? and under what conditions would a decrease in the monthly pace of purchases be appropriate? thank you. chair powell. thank you. so we say in our postmeeting statement that we’ll continue to increase our securities holdings “at least at the current pace” over coming months “to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions.” that latter part is an updating of our guidance to reflect what i’ve been saying in these press conferences for some time and what other central banks have acknowledged, which is that the purchases are fostering accommodative financial conditions as well. that amounts to roughly $80 billion a month of treasuries and $40 billion net per month for mbs.  so we do—we do think that these purchases have been effective in, in restoring orderly market conditions and have supported the flow of credit to households and businesses, including by fostering more accommodative financial conditions, which, of course, we think is a good thing. so, in terms of going forward, i would just say this: there are various ways and margins that we can adjust our tools going forward, and we’ll continue to monitor developments. and we’re prepared to adjust our plans as appropriate. nick timiraos. if i could—if i could follow up, i suppose the question i have is, why give guidance on one policy tool but not give guidance on the other policy tool when the fed has talked about those two policy tools working together? chair powell. so we, we think our—we think our policy stance is appropriate today, and we’re prepared to adjust it going forward as we, as we see appropriate. and today we believe that particularly this very strong forward guidance—very powerful forward guidance that we’ve announced today will provide strong support for the economy. effectively, we’re saying that rates will remain highly accommodative until the economy is far along in its recovery, and that, that should be a very powerful statement in supporting economic activity. now we’re buying $120 billion in securities per month across the—across the treasury curve. that’s also adding to accommodation. we do have the flexibility to adjust that tool and, and the rate tool and, and other tools as well. but as for right now, we think—we think that our policy setting is appropriate to support the expansion. we did—we said from the beginning that we would first try to provide some support and stability and relief in the first phase of the crisis, the acute phase, and then we would support the expansion when it came. well, it’s here. and it’s well along. and so that’s why we changed our guidance today, and we do have the flexibility to do more when we think it’s appropriate.  nick timiraos. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. jeanna. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking my question. jeanna smialek, new york times. i was wondering, you beefed up your language on financial stability in the long-run statement that you unveiled with your jackson hole speech last month. i’m wondering if you could kind of walk us through how you think about financial stability concerns as a factor in guiding and interpreting increases. you know, would financial stability concerns on their own be enough to merit changes in the fed funds rate? or would they have to come in conjunction with an overheating on inflation or some sort of dramatic drop in the unemployment rate? if you could, sort of, give us an outline of your thinking there, please. chair powell. so what we said in our statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy was that the committee’s policy decisions reflect “its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessment[s] of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals.” so that’s what we said about financial stability. and today we said that we’d “be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of our [the committee’s] goals.” but you asked specifically about, about financial stability. one thing i would say is that financial—that monetary policy should not be the first line of defense—is not the first line of defense on financial stability. we look to more appropriate tools in the first instance as a first line of defense, and those would be regulation, supervision, high capital, high liquidity, stress testing—all of those things, macroprudential tools. all of those things are, are really the first line of defense on financial stability. but we always leave open the idea that we will not ignore  those kinds of risks and other kinds of risks, more broadly, that could impede the attainment of our goals in, in setting monetary policy. so that’s, that’s really how we think about it, but principally that, you know, other tools are the—are the frontline, as i mentioned. jeanna smialek. just to follow up quickly, if, if other tools aren’t forthcoming, would financial stability concerns in and of themselves be enough to warrant a rate hike? chair powell. so, you know, what we said again in the [statement on] longer-run [goals and monetary policy strategy]—you know, in our consensus statement is that we, you know—“policy decisions reflect … the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals.” so the test would be, you know, does a majority of the committee feel that, that monetary policy is, is triggering that? and that, that would be—that would be the test. and, you know, it’s not something that we’ve done. we do monitor financial stability concerns, of course, intensely and regularly. we try to use our other tools on them, but we, we do keep them in mind as we think about monetary policy. michelle smith. thank you. steve liesman. steve liesman. mr. chairman, i wonder if you could help me understand how the projections of the committee line up with the goals of the committee. you’ve now altered the projections to—the statement to aim for inflation above 2 percent. but when i look at the sep, i don’t see the committee believing a single year in the next four years that you are ever above 2 percent. in fact, for each year, you are below it until 2023, which is the first time that you actually hit 2 percent. so do you think—are, are you confident—is this just the committee is not confident that not only can it not hit its 2 percent goal, but that now it can’t hit its goal of being above 2 percent?  chair powell. not at all. and, you know, you don’t—you also don’t see people, by and large, lifting off or raising interest rates above zero. i guess there are 4 exceptions out of a committee of 17 during that—during the forecast period. so we don’t reach 2 percent, but we get very close to it in the forecast. we reach 2 percent—i guess the median is 2 percent at the end of 2023. so, you know, you know what the guidance says. it says that we expect that the current setting of, of our rates will be—what we expect [is] that it will be appropriate until such time as we reach 2 percent inflation, that we feel that labor market conditions are consistent with our assessment of maximum employment, and that we’re on track to achieve inflation moderate—inflation moderately above. so that’s the test. so i don’t think there’s any conflict between those two because, you know, the, the way they’re set up, the projections don’t show the out years. you asked about confidence, and i would say that this, this very strong, very powerful guidance shows both our confidence and our determination. it shows our confidence that we can reach this goal and our determination to do so. steve liesman. i’m sorry, if i could just follow up without being simplistic about this. but why wouldn’t—if the committee was confident that it could reach its new goal of aiming for inflation above 2 percent, why wouldn’t one of those years at least show inflation being above 2 percent on the median forecast? chair powell. because it—we think, looking at everything we know about inflation dynamics in the united states and around the world over recent decades, we expect it will take some time. we expect that the economy will recover quickly now, but that that pace will slow as, as people go back to work. and we’ll still have an area of the economy—a big area of the economy—that struggles. there will be slack in the economy. the economy will be below  maximum employment, below full demand. and that will tend to wear—to put downward pressure on inflation. so we think that once we get up closer to maximum employment, we think that inflation will come back, generally. and, i mean, that’s sort of what happened during the last long expansion. it’s a slow process, but—but there is a process there. inflation does move up over time. we do expect that will continue today, and we expect that our, our guidance is powerful and will help that outcome. we think that—that effectively saying that policy will remain highly accommodative until the economy is very far along in its recovery should provide strong support for the economy and get us there sooner rather than later. steve liesman. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. rachel siegel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. thanks very much for taking my question. i wanted to ask if you anticipate a slowing in the pace of the recovery if there is not another stimulus package and, specifically, if there are particular holes still remaining in the economy that you think could be helped by more aid from congress. thanks very much. chair powell. sure. so, first, if you look at the summary of economic projections that my colleagues and i filed for this meeting, what you’ll see is an expectation that the recovery will continue—that it will continue at a reasonable pace through 2021, ’22, and ’23. we do expect that that pace will slow just because you would expect that the, the pace would be fastest right at the beginning of the—right at the beginning of the recovery, because you had such a sharp decline. you would expect that the third quarter should be the fastest gains, and that, after that, the pace should slow down to a more normal pace. so we do expect that. in terms of fiscal policy—you asked about fiscal policy. so, you know, one thing—i guess i would start by saying that the initial response from fiscal authorities was rapid. it was  forceful and pretty effective. and we’re seeing the results of that in—today in income and household spending data, in the labor market data, in the construction data, in the data for business equipment spending, and the fact that businesses are staying in business, and, you know, the pace of default and things like that has really slowed. so there’s been a really positive effect. that said, my sense is that more fiscal support is likely to be needed. of course, the details of that are for congress, not for the fed. but i would just say, there are still roughly 11 million people still out of work due to the pandemic, and a good part of those people were working in industries that are likely to struggle. those people may need additional, additional support as they try to find their way through what will be a difficult time for them. we’ve also got struggling small businesses, especially those in the business of facing directly to the public. and we have state and local governments dealing with a drop in revenue at the same time spending has gone up, much of it related to the pandemic and economic effects. so, again, i would say, the fiscal support has been essential in, in the good progress we see now. and, finally, i’ll note that just about all—the overwhelming majority of, of private forecasters who, who project an ongoing recovery are assuming there will be substantial additional fiscal support. michelle smith. thank you. mike derby. michael derby. [inaudible] taking my question. should we expect any further evolutions in forward guidance, say, maybe an adoption of something akin to the evans rule that we had a few years ago? or is there something else that the fed might be considering in the future?  chair powell. well, so we think that the forward guidance we adopted today is appropriate and, as i mentioned, powerful. effectively, what it says is that we’ll, we will keep policy where it is now—keep the rate policy where it is now until unemployment reaches the committee’s assessments or levels that are—sorry, not unemployment, labor market conditions reach levels that are consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment, until inflation reaches 2 percent, and until it’s on track to go above 2 percent moderately for some time. so that’s very strong forward guidance, and we think that that will be durable guidance that will provide significant support to the economy in coming years. so that’s, that’s really our thinking on, on forward guidance on rates. michelle smith. thank you. howard schneider. howard schneider. thanks. thanks, chair powell, for doing this. so to follow up on mike’s question there, since you described this guidance as durable, you—you’ve set up a three-part test here for rate hikes: levels consistent with assessments of maximum employment, inflation has risen to 2 percent, and you’re on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. each of these have modifiers, and i wonder if you could explain them a little bit more. how do we pin down assessments of maximum employment? when you say that “inflation has risen to 2 percent,” does that mean 2 percent for a day, a month, six months? and when you say “on track to moderately exceed,” how should we define “moderately”? and how should we define “for some time”? chair powell. so, as you know, maximum employment is not—is not something that can be reduced to a number the way inflation can. it’s a broad range of factors. it really always has been and, really, a substantial number of factors that we’ve indicated we would look at. so it’s broader labor conditions, consistent with our committee’s assessment of maximum  employment. so that would certainly mean low unemployment, it would mean high labor force participation, it would mean wages—it would be a whole range of things. and we’re not looking at a rule. we’re looking at a judgmental assessment, which i think we’ll be very transparent about as we—as we go forward. in terms of inflation, you know, this is a committee that is both confident and committed to—and determined to reach our goals. and the idea that we would look for the, the quickest way out is just—it’s just not who we are. it’s not that—there’s no message of that here. we would not be looking for one month of 2 percent inflation; we said return to 2—to achieve 2 percent inflation. okay. so just understand that, you know, we’re strongly committed to achieving our goals and the overshoot. so that should tell you about that. oh, in terms of—okay, in terms of—so, what does “moderate” mean? it means not large. it doesn’t—it means not very high above 2 percent. it means moderate. i think that’s a fairly well-understood word. in terms of—in terms of “for a time,” what it means is not permanently and not for a sustained period. you know, we’re, we’re resisting the urge to try to create some sort of a rule or a formula here. and i think the, the public will understand pretty well what we want. it’s actually pretty straightforward. we want to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. and if we do that, inflation expectations will be right at 2 percent, and that’ll help us achieve 2 percent inflation over time and avoid the situation where the central bank loses its ability to support the economy. michelle smith. thank you. james politi. james politi. thanks for taking the question. james politi with the financial times. do you consider today’s enhanced forward guidance to have actual accommodation to the—to the u.s. economy from a monetary perspective and sort of deliver further support for the  economy? or is it just a tweak to your existing policy stance? and, in terms of fiscal support, do you assume in your own projections—not just, you know, private forecasters—that additional fiscal support will be forthcoming? or do you expect weaker growth or a—or a larger contraction rather this year if no fiscal support is forthcoming? chair powell. so, in terms of the effects, so i think what we’ve done is—is more or less aligned with the consensus statement today. so it’s, it’s in line with what, what might have been expected. as i mentioned, i think over time it will provide very powerful support for this economy as we move forward. in a sense, it’s consistent with expectations, so i don’t—i’m not looking for a big reaction right now. but i think, over time, again, guidance that we expect to retain the current stance until the economy is—has moved very far toward our goals is a strong and powerful thing. and i think that will be supportive of the economy over time. in terms of additional fiscal support, i guess your question is, what would happen if— yes, so, people have different assessments, and, and different participants in the fomc made different assessments on their own. i think broadly, though, there is an expectation among private forecasters and among fomc participants that there will be some further fiscal action. and there does seem to be an appetite on the part of all the relevant players to doing something. the question is, how much and when? and so i would just say that if—and it’s very hard to say. so, so far the economy has proven resilient to the—to the lapsing of the—to the, of the cares act unemployment— enhanced unemployment benefits. but there’s, there’s certainly a risk, though, that, that those who are unemployed have saved—appear to have saved some of those benefits, and they’ll, they’ll now spend them, and that, as the months pass, if, if there’s no follow-up on that, if there isn’t additional support and there isn’t a job for the—some of those people who are, are from  industries where, where it’s going to be very hard to find new work, then you’ll—that will start to show up in economic activity. it’ll also show up in things like evictions and foreclosures and, and, you know, things that will scar and damage the economy. so that’s a downside risk. so i, i think the real question is, is, when and how much and what will be the—what will be the contents? and, you know, no one—no one has any certainty around that, but, broadly speaking, if we don’t get that, then there would certainly be downside risks through the— certainly through the channel i mentioned. michelle smith. thank you. anneken, cnn. anneken tappe. thanks for taking my question. chairman powell, given the recent update to the policy framework and repeated calls for this in the fed listens events, is the fed open to other measures of the economy, such as income inequality and affordability of housing? chair powell. so we—you know, we monitor everything we think is important in the u.s. economy. and in that—in a broad sense, all of it goes into thinking about monetary policy. you mentioned inequality. so, you know, disparities in, in income and in financial well- being by various demographic and racial categories is something we monitor carefully. inequality, which i would point to—it’s a multifaceted thing. but i would point to the relative stagnation of incomes for people at the lower end of the income spectrum and also lower mobility. so those are things that hold back our economy. they are. the thing is, we don’t really have the tools to address those. we, we have interest rates and bank supervision and financial stability policy and things like that, but we can’t—we can’t get at those things through our tools. when we lower the federal funds rate, that supports the economy across a broad range of, of people and activities, but we can’t—we don’t have the ability to target particular groups.  notwithstanding that, we, we do talk about it, because these are important features of our economy. and we—you know, i, i think those are—those distributional issues are, are issues that are really for our elected officials. and i would say, i take them seriously as holding back our economy. the productive capacity of the economy is limited when not everyone has the opportunity, has the educational background and, and the health care and all the things that you need to be an active participant in our workforce. so i think we can—if we want to have the, the highest potential output and the—and the best output for our economy, we need that prosperity to be very broadly spread in the longer run. and i—again, i would just say, the fed—you know, we can talk about those things a lot. and in, in—when we think about maximum employment in particular, we do look at individual groups. so high unemployment in a particular racial group like african americans when—you know, we would look at that as we think about whether we’re really at maximum employment. we would look—we would look at that along with a lot of other data. so the answer is, we do look at all those things and, and do what we can with our tools. but, ultimately, these are issues for elected representatives. michelle smith. thank you. edward lawrence. edward lawrence. yes, thank you, chairman powell, for the question. i just wanted some clarity here. at what point do you think it’s prudent to shift the bond purchases from market stability—as you had said, from the shorter-term maturities to more longer-term, more stimulus-related? chair powell. so, you know, we think our—we think that our asset purchases are doing both the thing—both those things today. we think, clearly, there’s been great progress, in terms of market function. if you remember, early in the spring when the acute phase of the  pandemic hit, market function was very low. and it’s improved rapidly and, and in many respects is, is in a good place now. we also, though, think that these asset purchases, which total $120 billion a month—you know, which is much larger than, for example, the last asset purchase program during the global financial crisis and the recovery therefrom—we think that that’s also providing accommodative financial conditions and supporting growth. and we think that’s fine. we’re also aware that we, we—there are ways we can adjust that, you know, to do various things—you know, make it smaller, make it larger, and also target different sectors of the—of the curve. and, you know, we’re, we’re going to continue to monitor developments, and we’re prepared to adjust our plans as appropriate. michelle smith. thank you. victoria. victoria guida. victoria guida. hi. thanks for taking my question. i wanted to ask about a couple of things. first of all, if we don’t get a vaccine until well into next year, what does that mean for the economy? and then, somewhat related, i was wondering if you could provide any more detail about the stress scenarios that you all are going to release for the big banks and whether that is going to be another full-blown stress test, whether we’re going to publicly see those results, and what it might mean for bank payouts. chair powell. great. so, on the first one, what’s happening is basically we’re learning to live with—right now, we're learning to live with covid, which still spreads. and we’re learning to, to engage in economic activity. all of this recovery that we’ve seen is in a context where—you know, where people are still at risk of, of catching it, and yet we’re able to resume lots and lots of economic activities. and that involves, as i mentioned, you know—i think the more social distancing we can preserve as we go back into the workforce—wearing masks, keeping our distance, that kind of thing—the better we’ll be able to get economic activity  back up close to where it was. i do think, though, there are areas of the economy that are just going to really struggle until we have an—a vaccine that’s, that’s in wide—you know, wide usage and is, is widely trusted. and those are the ones where people were getting really closely—close together. i also think testing—to the extent you have cheap and rapid testing, you can do a lot with that in the workforce. you can—you can build confidence in the workforce if you have regular—very regular testing that doesn’t cost very much and you get the results really quickly. if you do that, you’ll be able to open a lot of workforces, particularly in cities where the overall case numbers are quite low. and that will help a lot. so i think we’re, we’re going to be finding lots and lots of ways to get out towards—you know, as far as we can. there’s always going to be that—for, for some time, there’s going to be certain activities that will be—that will be hard to, to resume. so i, i think that’s the only way i can say it. and i think trying to—you know, we all—when we make a forecast, we make assessments about that, but it’s really hard to say. there is no template here. there’s no—you know, there’s no experience with this. so, frankly, for the last 60 days or so, the economy’s recovered faster than expected. and that may continue or not. we just don’t know. and i think we should do those things that we control to make sure that we can recover as quickly as possible. and the main thing, again, is wearing a mask and keeping your distance while you’re in the workforce. that’s something we can all do that will limit the spread and let people go back to work, avoid major outbreaks, and things like that.  in, in terms of the stress tests, so i really don’t have any—you know, we’re getting ready quite soon to be making announcements and saying things publicly. there’s not much i can say with you—nothing, really, that i can say that’s—on that today. i don’t have anything for you. michelle smith. thank you. chris condon. christopher condon. thank you, michelle. good afternoon, chairman powell. you have emphasized many times, including today, that the fed can only lend and not spend, and sometimes the latter is what’s really needed. but to the extent that a $600 billion lending program for small and midsize companies could help, what exactly is wrong with the design or function of the main street lending program, which has purchased just, i think, $1.4 billion in loans so far? eric rosengren at the boston fed has said recently that congress should clarify how much risk it wants the program to take. but congress has already appropriated substantial funds for the 13(3) programs, and these are funds that are explicitly designed to absorb losses. meanwhile, my colleagues who cover the banking sector say they’re being told by commercial banks that the treasury department is advising them to target zero losses—zero losses in main street program loans. so, if i may, why is it that the federal reserve, the congress, and the treasury apparently cannot agree on a loss tolerance that should be applied to the main street lending program in a way that would allow badly needed credit to reach these companies? thank you. chair powell. sure. so, a couple things about main street. it, it reaches the whole nation. it’s got more than half of the banking industry assets signed up among the banks that are part of it, and it’s making loans. the number is more like—it’s close to $2 billion now. so the numbers are going up. banks are joining; borrowers are coming. and it’s significant. it’s, it’s  relatively small now, but it can scale up in response to economic conditions, should that be— should that be appropriate. you know, if you look out in the lending world, surveys generally find that, that firms are not citing credit constraints as a top problem. and that, that is a lot of ppp, bank credit lines, and syndicated loans. there’s a lot of credit being let out there. so—but you’re right. we, we are looking at some things. we’re looking at—some lenders are concerned about the underwriting expectations. so banks are going to—their approach is likely to be that they’re going to underwrite this loan roughly the same as they underwrite any loan. they’re keeping part of it, and, you know, what, what we want to do is make sure that—that they know that they should take the payment deferrals and other things in, in place, and also that—you know, it’s, it’s really—it’s really a, a facility for, for companies or borrowers that, that don’t have access to, to “regular way” borrowing now. otherwise, why would we need main street? so that’s what we're working on. and we’ll be doing some, some—we’ll be making some changes in that respect. i don’t—i saw what president rosengren said. i, i can’t really comment directly on that. i just would say that, you know, this is 13(3). if you look at the law under section 13(3), it’s very clear that we are to make loans only to solvent borrowers. and, and the cares act is quite specific in keeping all of the terms of, of section 13(3) in effect, including the requirement that we, you know, gather good evidence that the borrower is solvent. this was—this law was amended in, you know, under—in dodd-frank, and the idea was, was to make it challenging and put hurdles in place before we made loans—at the time, the thinking was to banks. so now we—now we’re using that same law for, for smaller business borrowers, and, you know, it doesn’t—it’s not a perfect fit. and, and, i would also just say, for many borrowers,  they’re in a situation where their business is still relatively shut down, and they won’t be able to service a loan, and so they may need more fiscal support. having said that, we’re, we’re continuing to work to, to improve main street, to make it more broadly available—make it pretty much to any company that needs it and that can service a loan. christopher condon. and can you just very briefly address the reports that the treasury is advising banks to target zero losses? is that appropriate? chair powell. i can’t say. i don’t—i don’t know about that. i haven’t heard those reports. you know, again, if you think about it, we, we weren’t—we’re, we’re going to have to go through the banking system to do this. we—we’re not going to have a hundred thousand or a million loan officers working for the fed and the treasury. so we’re going to go through the banking system, and the banks—banks like to make good loans. that’s what they do. they’re trained to make good loans. so you should expect that they—and we expect that they will do some underwriting. we also want them to take some risk, obviously, because that was the point of it. and the question is, how do you dial that in? it’s, it’s not an easy thing to do. and, you know, we’re getting some loans made, and we’re hopeful that we’ll, that we’ll clarify this and that credit will continue to flow. michelle smith. thank you. chris rugaber. christopher rugaber. hi, thanks for taking my question. chair powell, you’ve talked a couple of times about parts of the economy that may not recover as fast as we’ve seen so far. presumably you’re referring to airlines, hotels, other sections—you know, parts of the economy that rely on close contact. how are you thinking about that, in terms of its overall impact? is that sector large enough to say keep unemployment above—you know, far above your maximum goals? are you expecting that to come back with a vaccine? or are a lot of  those folks going to have to find, you know, new jobs in new industries? and should we expect the fed will keep rates at zero until all of that reallocation is done? thank you. chair powell. yes, we—of course, we can’t be—we can’t be really sure we know the answers to those questions. but i would say, the, the likely path is that the—that the expansion will continue. and it’s, as i said, it’s well along, and it’ll move most easily through the parts of the economy—it’ll still take some time, but the parts of the economy that weren’t exactly directly affected, that didn’t involve getting people in large groups together to feed them, to fly them around, to put them in hotels, do entertainment, things like that—those are going to be the places that are—that are very challenging. so there will also be the—you know, the places that are affected that way. and that’s going to be challenging for, for some time. it just is. and we don’t really know how long that will be. it’s—you know, it’s millions of people. as i mentioned, we had 11 million—something like 11 million people in the payroll survey have gone back to work out of 22 million who went—who lost their jobs in march and april. so that’s half of them. so, 11 million— particularly if the pace of, of returning to work slows down, it’s going to leave a large—a large group of people. and it’ll be very meaningful from a macroeconomic standpoint. and our commitment is not to forget those people. as i mentioned, we want—you know, the sense of our forward guidance is that policy will remain, as we’ve said, highly accommodative until the— until the expansion is well along—really, very close to our goals. and even after, if we do lift off, we will keep policy accommodative until we actually have a moderate overshoot of inflation for some time. so those are powerful commitments that we think will, will support the full recovery, including those people, as long as it takes. michelle smith. thank you. mike mckee.  michael mckee. mr. chairman, michael mckee from bloomberg radio and television. based on what you were just saying about keeping policy accommodative for a very long time into the recovery, lower-for-longer as far out as three years in your latest projections, is that basically it for the fed? in other words, since interest rates are your main tool, the things you can do would push down on interest rates. but is it really—is it the case now that the only additional stimulus that can come to the economy is from the fiscal side? chair powell. well, no, i wouldn’t—i certainly would not say that we’re out of ammo. not at all. so, first of all, we, we do have lots of tools. we’ve got the lending tools, we’ve got the balance sheet, and we’ve got further forward guidance—further forward guidance. so we, we—there’s still plenty more that we can do. we do think that our—that our, our rate policy stance is an appropriate one to support the economy. we think it’s powerful. and, as i mentioned, you know, this is the kind of guidance that will provide support for the economy over time, the idea being that policy will remain highly accommodative until the recovery is well along—really, very close to our goals—and then will remain accommodative even after we lift off. so i think that’s, that’s a really strong place for, for rate policy to be. but, again, we have the other margins that we can still use. so, no. certainly, we’re not out of ammo. michael mckee. well, if i could follow up, in terms of the balance sheet, are you concerned that your actions are more likely to produce asset price inflation than goods-and- services inflation? in other words, are you risking a bubble on wall street? chair powell. you know, so, of course we monitor financial conditions very carefully. these are—these are not new questions. these were questions that were very much in the air a decade ago and more when, when the fed first started doing qe. and, i would say, if you look at the long experience of, you know, the 10-year, 8-month expansion, the longest in our  recorded history, it included an awful lot of quantitative easing and low rates for 7 years. and, i would say, it was notable for the lack of the emergence of, of some sort of a financial bubble—a housing bubble or some kind of a bubble, the popping of which could threaten the expansion. that didn’t happen. and, frankly, it hasn’t really happened around the world since then. that doesn’t mean that it won’t happen, but—and so, of course, it’s something that we monitor carefully. after the financial crisis, we started a new—a whole division of the fed to focus on financial stability. we look at it in every—from every perspective. the fomc gets briefed on a quarterly basis. at the board here, we talk about it more or less on an ongoing basis, so it is something we monitor. but i don’t know that the—that the connection between asset purchases and, and financial stability is a particularly tight one. so—but again, we won’t be—we won’t be just assuming that. we’ll be checking carefully as we go. and, by the way, the kinds of tools that we would use to address those sorts of things are not really monetary policy. it would be more tools that strengthen the financial system. michelle smith. thank you. don lee. don lee. chair powell, i’d like to ask you about the labor market. as you know, in august there were about 30 million persons claiming unemployment benefits. yet the bls jobs report for august showed about 13½ million unemployed, only about 6 million more than before the pandemic. i wonder how you reconcile that and what you think the actual labor market conditions are. chair powell. so, i mean, i think the overall picture—take a step back from this. the overall picture is clear, and that is that the labor market has been recovering, but that it’s a long way—a long way from maximum employment. i think that’s, that’s the bottom line on it.  so, within that, though—take claims in particular. the number of claims, the quantity of claims, and, frankly, the fact that pua claims are new—the pandemic unemployment assistance claims—that’s a new system that had to be set up. the actual counting of the claims is, is volatile, and, and it’s very difficult to take much signal about the particular level. so, you know, because people were setting those systems up, and when they got them set up, they counted them all at once and things like that. i think, though, what you’ve seen is that the level of—certainly the level of initial claims has declined very sharply from the very high levels of march and april and is now at a lower level—continues either to be flat or gradually decline. it’s worth noting—and that’s good—it’s worth noting that that level is maybe five times the level of what claims were. claims were around 200,000; now they’re 900,000, in that range, weekly for, for initial claims. so that just tells you, the labor market has improved, but it’s a long, long way from maximum employment, and it will be some time getting back there. i think that’s the best way to think about it. in many parts of the economy there’s just a lot of disruption, and it’s, it’s really hard to say precisely where we are. i’ll give you another example with—you know, we say unemployment’s 8.4 percent. but if you count those who are—who are misidentified as, as employed when they’re actually unemployed and you add back some part of the participation number—so if you were—if you had a job and you were in the labor force in february and you lost it because of the pandemic, some of you are now being reported as out of the labor force. but i—you know, i would—i would more look at those people as unemployed. if you add those back, the level of unemployment’s probably 3 percent higher. on the other hand, by that metric, the, the  unemployment rate would have been in the—in the 20s in, in april. so the improvement has been quite substantial under any measurement. but the level is still quite high. don lee. well, if i could follow up, is—is it the fed’s aim to get back to 3.5 percent or even lower? chair powell. yes, absolutely. you know, i, i can’t be precise about a particular number, but let me just say, there was a lot to like about 3½ percent unemployment. it’s not a magic number. no one would say that number is the touchstone or that is, you know, maximum employment. i would just say, you asked about 3½ percent. a 3½ percent unemployment rate showed, you know, gains being shared very widely across the income spectrum—in fact, going more to people at the bottom end of the spectrum. it showed labor force participation coming up as—up above many estimates of its trend, as people who’d been out of the labor force were being pulled into a tight job market. there’s a lot to like about a tough—a tight job market, particularly in a world where we didn’t see inflation. so, yes, we’d love to get back to that. i mean, i would say, we would like to get back—rather than to a particular number, we’d like to get back to a strong labor market where wages are moving up, where people can find work, where labor force participation is holding up nicely. that’s what we’d really love to get back to. now, of course we would—we need inflation to perform in line with, with our framework. but the good news is, we think we can have quite low unemployment without raising troubling inflation. michelle smith. thank you. nancy marshall-genzer. nancy marshall-genzer. hi, nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. chair powell, i want to follow up on the wealth gap issue. i know you were—that you have limited  tools. but are there things that you can do, possibly in the area of research and maybe expand your research on racial economic gaps? chair powell. you know, we do—we are gifted with a, a substantial group of researchers who really cover the waterfront. and we do a significant amount of research on racial disparities in—across multiple variables, including wealth, as you asked about. so we do that. and we also—remember, we have our division of consumer and community affairs, which is present in communities around the country. and the reserve banks all have very active community affairs groups. they’re present in communities around the country. so it wasn’t just the fed—fed listens events. it’s more, just, over a long period of time we, we are in contact with people in those communities to understand their experience of the economy. we serve all americans, and we know that. and we’re going to use our tools to, to reflect that fact. so the answer is “yes.” we do quite a bit of research, and i suppose we could do more, but we really do a lot. and we contribute to those fields and those assessments of, of the state of the economy. and we do that not just because it’s interesting and important, but because it’s important for the economy and important for our mandate. we are assigned “maximum employment.” now, what does that mean? as i mentioned earlier, it doesn’t mean a particular headline unemployment number. what it means is maximum employment. so, you know, we look at—look at that in many, many different variables, and we ask ourselves whether those variables are—those labor market conditions are consistent with our assessments of what would constitute maximum employment. and that would include all of the things that we’re talking about. michelle smith. thank you. greg robb.  greg robb. hi, greg robb from marketwatch. thanks for this. i want to go back to the new forward guidance that you have. and you said that it’s powerful, but you’ve already have two dissent—two dissenting voters on it. and i was wondering if there’s other, other people who argued against it. and what do you say to the two who dissented? it looks like president kashkari wanted a simpler forward guidance, and president kaplan thought that the current guidance you have was fine for now. so, like, how did you argue back on those, on those arguments? thank you. chair powell. i wouldn’t—i don’t want to comment particularly on, on the two dissenters, but they, they consent—they dissented from, of course, different perspectives, and, and that should be clear. that’s their—they’re not—they’re sort of on, on two sides of the, of the discussion. but i would say this: i am blessed with having a committee of highly thoughtful people who bring diverse life experiences and diverse careers, and, of course, diverse views to our work. and i wouldn’t have it any other way. i wouldn’t. so, so i would just say, the right—in our discussions the last couple of days, the whole committee, everybody on the committee is very supportive of the statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy and what’s in there—very, very broad support, unanimous support for that. everyone sees the, the changes in the underlying economy and sees, in their own way, the need to address those—and including the changes we made to the employment mandate and to inflation so that we’re now at flexible average inflation targeting. of course, there would be—this is—you know, we’re the first major central bank to adopt this framework. there’s no cookbook, and we—you know, this is the first guidance under our new framework. so, of course there would be a wide range of views, and you would expect that. and it’s actually a healthy thing. so i welcome that discussion. i would also say this: you  know, this is all about credibility, and we understand perfectly that we have to earn credibility. this, this facility—this, this framework has to—we have to support it with our actions. and i think today is a very good first step in doing that. it is strong, powerful guidance. it is—it ties in very nicely with the statement of [on] longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. we had quite a robust discussion, and there are, there are different ideas on how to do this, but i—that’s just, that’s just the way it is when you have a diverse group of highly thoughtful and effective people. and so i’m pleased with where it came out. michelle smith. thank you. hannah lang. hannah lang. hi, chair powell. thanks so much for taking my question. i wanted to ask about commercial real estate. i, i know you had mentioned before how you weren’t sure if there was a way the fed could support cre borrowers. but i was just wondering if you had—if you’ve had any other continuing discussions on that and if there’s any potential way that the fed could step in in that area. chair powell. so thank you for that question. you know, we’ve actually spent quite a bit of time on this as secretary mnuchin, i think, mentioned the other day. and i’ll say just a couple things. first, you know, our facilities are essentially always—they have to be, under the law—broad based and not so much targeting any single sector. also, it’s important to remember that cre, commercial real estate, benefits from several of our existing facilities. so the talf takes commercial mortgage-backed securities and sba commercial real estate deals. and the new york fed purchases agency cmbss directly. in addition, i would say, main street helps businesses pay their rent, you know. so we’re, we’re helping real estate, you know, in a number of other ways—commercial real estate.  also, cmbs issuance has resumed. spreads have tightened on cmbs. there are a couple of issues. one is just that commercial properties with cmbs loans often have covenants—uniformly, i think, have covenants that forbid them to take on more debt. so you have a situation, and you have a situation where, where you—without a legal change or some kind of an innovation that defies discovery so far, you’re—you have a hard time providing mass relief with regard to real estate that’s in, in commercial mortgage-backed securities. so we’re still working on it. we’re still looking. i would say, it may be that further support for commercial real estate will require further action for congress—from congress. michelle smith. for the last question, we’ll go to brian cheung. brian cheung. hi, chairman powell. so it seems like a lot of the new inflation framework is about shaping inflation expectations. but the average american who might be watching this might be confused as to why the fed is overshooting inflation. so what’s your explanation to main street, to average people what the fed is trying to do here and what the outcome would be for those on main street? thanks. chair powell. that’s a very, very important question, and i actually spoke about that in my jackson hole remarks a couple weeks ago. it’s not intuitive to people. it is intuitive that, that high inflation is a bad thing. it’s less intuitive that inflation can be too low. and the way i would explain it is, is that inflation that’s too low will mean that interest rates are lower. there’s an expectation of future inflation that’s built into every interest rate, right? and to the extent inflation gets lower and lower and lower, interest rates get lower and lower. and then the fed will have less room to cut rates to support the economy. and this isn’t some idle, you know, academic theory. this is what’s happening all over the world. if you, if you look at many, many large jurisdictions around the world, you are seeing that phenomenon.  so we want inflation to be—we want it to be 2 percent, and we want it to average 2 percent. so if inflation averages 2 percent, the public will expect that, and that’ll be what’s built into interest rates. and that’s just—that’s all we want. so we’re not looking to have high inflation. we just want inflation to average 2 percent. and that means that, you know, in a downturn, these days, what happens is, inflation, as has happened now—it moves down well below 2 percent. and that means that we’ve said for, for—we would like to see and we will conduct policies so that inflation moves, for some time, moderately above 2 percent. so it won’t be—these won’t be large overshoots, and they won’t be permanent but to help anchor inflation expectations at 2 percent. so, yes, it’s, it’s a challenging concept for a lot of people. but, nonetheless, the economic importance of it is, is large. and, you know, those are the people we’re serving, and, you know, we serve them best if we can actually achieve average 2 percent inflation, we believe. and that’s why we changed our framework. michelle smith. thank you very much. chair powell. thanks very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 1 2 page 2 federal open market committee  division of research and statistics, board of governors; jeffrey d. walker,2 deputy associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board of governors brian j. bonis and laura lipscomb, assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board of governors penelope a. beattie, 3 section chief, office of the secretary, board of governors; dana l. burnett and felicia ionescu, section chiefs, division of monetary affairs, board of governors mark a. carlson, senior economic project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors david h. small, project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors michele cavallo, jonathan e. goldberg, and kurt f. lewis, principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board of governors randall a. williams, senior information manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors meredith black, first vice president, federal reserve bank of dallas david altig, kartik b. athreya, joseph w. gruber, sylvain leduc, anna paulson, daleep singh, and christopher j. waller, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of atlanta, richmond, kansas city, san francisco, chicago, new york, and st. louis, respectively argia m. sbordone and patricia zobel, vice presidents, federal reserve bank of new york jenny tang, senior economic policy advisor, federal reserve bank of boston opening remarks the chair, vice chair williams, and governor clarida opened the meeting with remarks in memory of thomas laubach. 3 attended tuesday’s session only. chair powell: “thomas was unquestionably one of the great economic minds of his generation, and his research has been central to some of our biggest discussions and policy actions over the past several years. he had a rare and underappreciated gift for translating arcane and academic theory into real world practice. that ability made a real difference in the conduct and communication of monetary policy. from his work on r*, to the balance sheet, to leading the steering committee for our monetary policy review, thomas laubach’s intellectual fingerprints are all over the committee’s decisions that will define this era of the federal reserve. thomas was also an exceptional colleague, leader, and friend. no one here will be surprised to know that as condolences pour in, the admiration for his kindness and equanimity match, if not exceed, the esteem for his intellect. thomas was a model of leadership who fiercely believed that every member of his team is critical to our collective success, and he made certain they knew it. even as he battled his own health problems, working through treatment to help fight the economic fallout of a global pandemic, his concern lay with others. amid a deluge of emergency work to fight a historic downturn and the upending of daily life, thomas urged people to take care of themselves and their families first. it is a testament to the mutual respect and amity that it was thomas’s team who proposed the tealbook dedication in his memory. as friends, colleagues, and collaborators, we all grieve his loss. his absence leaves a space that cannot truly be filled. we will miss thomas laubach’s intellect and his insight. more importantly, we will miss thomas laubach.” vice chair williams: “thomas and i started working together 20 years ago. he had just arrived at the board from the kansas city fed, and i had returned from my stint at the council of economic advisers. and it was truly serendipitous. we immediately recognized the shared interest in figuring out how to estimate this thing called the minutes of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 3  natural rate of interest. and more importantly, thomas was an expert in kalman filtering. so we were off to the races on that project. ironically, given subsequent events, the question of the time was whether the productivity boom had driven r* higher. in fact, if you go back to our december 2000 memo, our first memo to the board on r*, our original estimates had r* at 4¼ percent, and that’s real, not nominal. so that’s a 6¼ percent nominal r*. those were the days. jumping ahead 15 years, following his appointment as director of monetary affairs, thomas would frequently, and very earnestly, ask me how he could be most effective in his role as an adviser to the fomc. and i’d remind him that the committee has at times been compared to a herd of cats. but he was always looking for ways to raise his game, and hopefully ours, and help the committee grapple with issues and decisions before us. sometimes that effort led to briefings with a labyrinth of charts and figures, where thomas heroically tried to make sense of our summary of economic projections (sep) projections and the implicit policy rule that must be embedded in them if you only looked hard enough. or it goes without saying how everything makes more sense once you factor in r*. his role as trusted adviser was never more on display or important than during the framework review as chair powell just commented. thomas focused on making sure the committee was prepared with the very best information and analysis. he consistently moved us towards the goal line, even as he engaged in a complex range of issues and dealt with the effects of the pandemic. and he scrupulously played the role of honest broker throughout. indeed, he perfected the formula for herding cats. it’s one part keen intellect, a dollop of understated humor, and a big helping of patience and perseverance.” governor clarida: “thomas laubach was a remarkable human being who just happened to be a world class economist. his passing last week represents of course an incalculable loss for his family, but is also a devastating blow felt by each and every one of us in the federal reserve system, and indeed, in major central banks around the world that he frequently visited. before i arrived at the board, i knew thomas primarily through his research. his book on inflation targeting with ben bernanke, rick mishkin, and adam posen is a classic reference on the subject, as is his work with president williams on r*. i would say thomas had a talent for picking co-authors. thomas and i first met when he was a ph.d. student working on the book and we were both visiting the new york fed. i remember well our first meeting 25 years ago, and i was struck then by thomas’s enthusiasm that he brought to economics as a graduate student. thomas of course never lost that spark and joy for the practice of monetary policy, and we are all fortunate that he did not. i—and i’m sure chair powell, and before him, chair yellen—trusted him implicitly. and speaking for myself, i always sought his insight and advice privately in my office and counsel on all of the big policy decisions i’ve had to consider in my two years as vice chair. thomas made everyone that he worked with better and inspired to put forth their best energy and effort to achieve larger goals. that was most certainly the case in the framework review, and i’ll second what vice chair williams and chair powell said. thomas brought peerless leadership, energy, and a commitment to the entire framework review. we simply would not have achieved the evolution of our framework and strategy without thomas and the insight, inspiration, and good judgment he brought to the project and the ambitious process that he designed and worked with us to implement. i understand that in thomas’s last days, he was able to watch the chair’s speech at jackson hole rolling out the new framework, and that he was so proud to have been part of what the wall street journal called a landmark change in u.s. monetary policy. i’m sure i speak for all of us when i conclude by saying that it is we who are proud to have had the privilege of working with thomas laubach during his 20 years at the fed. he is and will be deeply missed, but his spirit and inspiration to us all will endure.” page 4 federal open market committee  developments in financial markets and open market operations the system open market account (soma) manager first discussed developments in financial markets. on net, financial conditions eased over the intermeeting period. equity prices rose and the broad dollar continued to depreciate from its crisis-driven peak in march. yields on treasury inflation-protected securities fell, while longer-dated nominal treasury yields increased modestly. market participants attributed these developments to a stronger economic outlook, better news on the covid19 trajectory, better-than-feared corporate earnings reports, and accommodative policy. against this backdrop, most respondents to the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants perceived downside risks to u.s. gross domestic product (gdp) growth this year as having declined notably since the july survey, and their forecasts for overall growth for 2020 were revised up significantly. while the economic outlook had brightened, market participants continued to see significant risks ahead. some noted concerns about elevated asset valuations in certain sectors. many also cited geopolitical events as heightening uncertainty. in addition, most forecasters were assuming that an additional pandemic-related fiscal package would be approved this year, and noted that, absent a new package, growth could decelerate at a faster-than-expected pace in the fourth quarter. in light of these and other risks, as well as the ongoing pandemic, market participants continued to suggest that the supportive policy environment and the backstops to market functioning remained important stabilizers. the release of the revised statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy (consensus statement) elicited relatively modest immediate reaction across markets. however, market participants generally viewed the completion of the review as an important milestone; many indicated that growing expectations for the committee to adopt a flexible average-inflationtargeting regime had influenced asset prices over recent months. in particular, these expectations were viewed as contributing to the recent rise in far-forward measures of inflation compensation, though market participants noted that these measures were still somewhat low by historical standards. market participants continued to anticipate that the committee would update its forward guidance for the federal funds rate. most respondents to the desk’s surveys continued to indicate that they expected the fomc to adopt outcome-based forward guidance linked to inflation; some noted that employment measures could be part of the forward guidance as well. survey respondents’ expectations for the economic conditions that would prevail when the fomc first lifted the target range had shifted notably since the previous survey, with many respondents projecting somewhat higher inflation and lower unemployment than in july. expectations for asset purchases this year remained tightly centered around the current pace; however, many survey respondents revised up the amount of asset purchases expected in 2021 and 2022. the manager turned next to a discussion of funding market conditions and open market operations over the period. conditions in short-term dollar funding markets remained stable over the period. overnight secured and unsecured rates continued to trade in narrow ranges near the interest on excess reserves rate. forward measures of funding rates implied that conditions were expected to remain stable in coming months. markets for treasury securities and agency mortgagebacked securities (mbs) continued to function smoothly, with bid-ask spreads and a range of other indicators remaining near pre-pandemic levels. indicators of functioning in the market for agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) also remained stable. in light of the improved conditions, the staff proposed that the desk no longer be required to increase agency cmbs holdings or reinvest principal payments for agency cmbs. for the time being, the desk would continue to conduct regular agency cmbs operations to maintain backstop capacity. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the covid-19 pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activity in the united states and abroad. the information available at the time of the september 15–16 meeting suggested that u.s. real gdp was rebounding at a rapid rate in the third quarter. labor market conditions continued to improve markedly in july and august, but employment was still below its level at the beginning of the year. consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce) through july— minutes of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 5  remained well below the rates that prevailed early in the year. total nonfarm payroll employment expanded strongly in july and august, although payrolls had retraced only about half of the jobs lost at the onset of the pandemic. the unemployment rate moved down further to 8.4 percent in august. the unemployment rates for african americans, asians, and hispanics declined over the past two months but remained well above the national average. the labor force participation rate rose, on net, and the employment-to-population ratio increased further in july and august. initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits continued to move down, on net, through early september, but the pace of declines had slowed. in addition, weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by the board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp suggested that employment gains likely were still solid from mid-august to early september. total pce price inflation was 1.0 percent over the 12 months ending in july, reflecting both weak aggregate demand and a considerable drop in consumer energy prices early this year. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was 1.3 percent over the same 12-month period. by comparison, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 1.8 percent in july. the consumer price index (cpi) increased 1.3 percent over the 12 months ending in august, while core cpi inflation was 1.7 percent over the same period. on a monthly basis, recent inflation readings were bolstered by increases in durable goods prices, largely reflecting the strong demand for consumer goods as household purchases shifted away from many consumer services. the latest readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations moved up a bit but remained within their ranges in recent years. the university of michigan surveys of consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years edged up in july and august, and the threeyear-ahead measure from the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations also crept up over the past two months. real pce expanded strongly in july and continued to be bolstered by supportive fiscal and monetary policy actions. in august, the components of retail sales used to estimate pce, along with sales of light motor vehicles, increased further. however, recent high-frequency indicators of spending on some consumer services—such as restaurant dining, hotel accommodations, and air travel—were still subdued. real disposable personal income was roughly flat in july, primarily reflecting further gains in wage and salary income that were largely offset by the waning of government transfer payments from their peak in the spring. nevertheless, the personal saving rate remained quite elevated. the consumer sentiment measure from the michigan survey edged up in august, while the conference board survey measure moved down; both measures continued to be below their levels at the beginning of the year. housing-sector activity continued to expand, likely supported by the effects of low interest rates. starts and building permit issuance for single-family homes, along with starts of multifamily units, increased further in july. sales of both new and existing homes also rose substantially further. these measures of construction and sales were generally at or near their pre-pandemic levels. indicators of business fixed investment suggested that this sector was beginning to recover on balance. nominal new orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased in july, the third consecutive monthly increase in these indicators of business equipment spending. many measures of business sentiment also improved somewhat in july and august. in addition, the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation through early september—an indicator of business spending on structures in the drilling and mining sector—had flattened out recently following its declines since the spring. in contrast, nominal business spending on nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector declined over june and july. industrial production expanded further in july and august, although at a less rapid pace than over the preceding two months. the increase in factory output was broad based, but the gains for most manufacturing industries had slowed gradually since june. production in the mining sector—which includes crude oil and natural gas drilling and extraction—increased in july but fell in august, as tropical storm marco and hurricane laura caused sharp but temporary decreases in extraction and drilling. total real government purchases appeared to be increasing modestly, on balance, in the third quarter. federal defense spending continued to rise through august, and federal employment was boosted markedly by temporary census-related hiring. state and local government payrolls expanded in july and august, although nominal state and local construction expenditures decreased in june and july. page 6 federal open market committee  after declining sharply earlier this year, exports and imports of goods and services increased strongly in june and july. on net, over these two months, the nominal u.s. international trade deficit widened, as imports rose more than exports. exports and imports of goods rose in june and july in most major product categories, while exports and imports of services rose modestly following previous historic declines. foreign economic activity plunged in the second quarter as a result of the covid-19 pandemic and the associated restrictive measures to contain it. with some of these measures having been rolled back in recent months, economic indicators pointed to a large, but partial, rebound in most foreign economies in the third quarter. recent indicators of household and business spending were strong in several economies (including canada, the euro area, and brazil), reflecting in part a boost from substantial government support programs. in china, economic indicators showed a continued moderate expansion after a sharp rebound in the second quarter, though gains in consumption continued to lag those in production and exports. similarly, in mexico, a strong rebound in manufacturing production contrasted with weak services activity. despite the widespread rebound in foreign activity indicators, a resurgence in covid-19 cases in parts of europe and asia added uncertainty to the outlook for those economies. recent readings of headline and core inflation abroad remained quite low, particularly in the advanced foreign economies (afes), amid subdued demand pressures and lower energy prices from earlier this year. staff review of the financial situation financial market sentiment improved over the intermeeting period, boosted by declines in the number of new covid-19 cases in the united states and strongerthan-anticipated corporate earnings reports and domestic economic data releases. broad stock price indexes rose, on net, despite notable declines late in the intermeeting period. inflation compensation increased further, reaching pre-pandemic levels. changes in other asset prices were generally more modest but were consistent with improved sentiment: the treasury yield curve steepened a little, spreads on speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed moderately, and the exchange value of the dollar depreciated modestly. meanwhile, financing conditions for businesses with access to capital markets and households with high credit scores remained broadly accommodative, although conditions remained tight for other borrowers. yields on 2-year nominal treasury securities were little changed since the july fomc meeting, while 10- and 30-year yields rose moderately. market commentary attributed the increases in longer-term yields to improved investor sentiment. this improved sentiment partly reflected the decline in new covid-19 cases in the united states and stronger-than-expected economic data, although market reactions to economic data releases were limited. the near-dated implied volatility on 10-year treasury securities was little changed over the intermeeting period and remained near the bottom of its historical range. measures of inflation compensation based on tips maturing over the next few years continued to increase, likely reflecting the general improvement in investor sentiment accompanying the improvement in the economic outlook, some further improvements in tips market liquidity, and the higher-than-expected july cpi data release. the 5-year and 5-to-10-year measures of inflation compensation were close to their pre-pandemic levels but were still in the lower end of their historical ranges. the expected path for the federal funds rate over the next few years, as implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes, was little changed, on net, since the july fomc meeting and remained close to the effective lower bound (elb) through the first half of 2024. communications about monetary policy over the intermeeting period generally had little effect on treasury yields or the expected path of the federal funds rate. however, market participants suggested that building expectations that the committee would move to a form of flexible average inflation targeting under the revised consensus statement had been a factor boosting tips inflation compensation over recent months. broad stock price indexes rose, on net, during the intermeeting period, consistent with generally better-than-expected news on both the economy and second-quarter corporate earnings. one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—was roughly unchanged, on net, although measures of longer-term downside risks in equity markets, such as the option-implied cost of insuring against a 10 percent decline in the s&p 500 index in three months, increased somewhat. spreads of investment- and speculative-grade corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity treasury yields narrowed somewhat and remained near their historical medians. conditions in short-term funding markets were stable over the intermeeting period. spreads on commercial paper (cp) and negotiable certificates of deposit across different tenors changed little, on net, and remained minutes of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 7  around levels observed before the pandemic. total gross cp issuance also remained within pre-pandemic normal ranges, although outstanding volumes of nonfinancial cp declined moderately since the july fomc meeting. assets under management of prime and government money market funds (mmfs) declined modestly on net. partly reversing changes observed between april and july, institutional government mmfs, on net, decreased their holdings of treasury securities and increased their holdings of repurchase agreements (repos) in august. the reversal was driven in part by a tighter spread between treasury bill yields and repo rates. amid normalizing market conditions, there was little activity in the money market mutual fund liquidity facility or the commercial paper funding facility. the effective federal funds rate and the secured overnight financing rate averaged 9 basis points over the intermeeting period. the amount of federal reserve repo outstanding remained at zero over the intermeeting period due to more attractive rates in the private market. meanwhile, the federal reserve increased holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs at the same pace as during the previous intermeeting period. foreign asset price movements were generally muted, with market participants likely weighing concerns over rising infection rates in some countries against the prospect of a covid-19 vaccine. in emerging market economies (emes), asian equity markets significantly outperformed latin american counterparts, with chinese equities showing particular strength. in most afes, equity indexes rose modestly and long-term sovereign yields edged higher. in line with the modest improvement in risk sentiment, the staff’s broad dollar index declined moderately, on net, with the dollar depreciating more against eme currencies. the chinese renminbi was boosted by betterthan-expected chinese economic data and was the most notable contributor to the decline in the staff’s tradeweighted dollar index, along with the mexican peso. among afe currencies, the euro appreciated further and reached its highest level against the dollar since 2018. the pound was little changed, as some of its earlier appreciation against the dollar unwound amid a resurgence of brexit-related uncertainty. financing conditions in capital markets remained accommodative over the intermeeting period. amid historically low corporate bond yields, gross issuance of both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds was strong in july and august. much of this recent issu- ance was intended to refinance existing debt. gross institutional leveraged loan issuance picked up slightly in july but remained below the levels observed during the same period last year. amid notable equity market gains in august, gross equity issuance was robust, as seasoned offerings strengthened to about double their typical pace. commercial and industrial loans outstanding declined in july and august, but at a slower pace than in june, with declines in large part reflecting continued credit-line repayment. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations showed tentative signs of stabilization over the intermeeting period. the dollar volume of nonfinancial corporate bond downgrades continued to exceed upgrades, albeit only modestly, representing a sizable reduction in net downgrades since the spring. the pace of nonfinancial corporate bond defaults in july was also notably lower than in april and may but was still elevated relative to prepandemic levels. default volumes fell further in august, reaching a level below the 2019 monthly average. market indicators of future default expectations also improved somewhat. financing conditions for small businesses remained tight, although some indicators pointed to a slight improvement. thirty-day delinquency rates fell modestly between may and july but remained comparable with early 2008 levels. the credit needs of small businesses remained high, with significant shares of respondents to the census bureau’s small business pulse survey reporting scarce cash availability and anticipating a need for financial assistance in the next six months. municipal market financing conditions remained accommodative since the july fomc meeting. however, the credit quality of municipal debt deteriorated somewhat, driven by a relatively large volume of credit rating downgrades of revenue bonds. financing conditions for commercial real estate (cre) intermediated through capital markets recovered further over the intermeeting period. spreads on triple-b nonagency cmbs remained wide, though they continued to narrow through august, while triple-a spreads remained close to pre-pandemic levels. issuance of non-agency cmbs was steady but subdued relative to pre-pandemic levels. spreads on agency cmbs were tight and issuance was very strong, setting a new single-month record in july. in contrast, cre loan growth at banks was weak in july and august, likely partly driven by the recovery of cmbs markets. delinquency rates on mortgages backing cmbs fell a bit in july but remained high in the hotel and retail sectors. page 8 federal open market committee  financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were little changed over the intermeeting period. while mortgage rates hovered near historical lows, the spread between primary mortgage rates and mbs yields remained quite wide. credit continued to flow to higherscore borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria, while it remained tight for borrowers with lower credit scores and for nonstandard mortgage products. nonetheless, low mortgage rates were supporting both home-purchase originations and refinancing. the credit quality of mortgages improved slightly, with the rate of transition into delinquency remaining near prepandemic levels and forbearance continuing to slowly decline. financing conditions in consumer credit markets remained accommodative for borrowers with relatively strong credit scores but continued to be tight for subprime borrowers. auto loan balances increased solidly overall but declined for borrowers with low credit scores. credit card balances contracted at a slower rate in june and july than in the spring. however, offered interest rates rose and credit limits edged down for credit cards to nonprime borrowers. conditions in the assetbacked securities (abs) market were stable during the intermeeting period. abs spreads edged down, and auto and student loan issuance was robust. consumer credit performance remained stable, and the share of auto and credit card balances in forbearance declined. staff economic outlook in the u.s. economic projection prepared by the staff for the september fomc meeting, the rate of real gdp growth and the pace of declines in the unemployment rate were faster over the second half of this year than in the july forecast, primarily reflecting recent better-thanexpected data. in addition, the inflation forecast for the rest of the year was revised up slightly, as some recent consumer goods prices were stronger than expected. nevertheless, inflation was still projected to be subdued this year, reflecting substantial slack in resource utilization and the sizable declines in consumer energy prices earlier this year. fiscal policy measures, along with the support from monetary policy and the federal reserve’s liquidity and lending facilities, were expected to continue supporting the second-half recovery, although the recovery was forecast to be far from complete by year-end. the staff’s forecast assumed the enactment of some additional fiscal policy support this year; without that additional policy action, the pace of the economic recovery would likely be slower. in the staff’s medium-term projection, the baseline assumptions included that the current restrictions on social interactions and business operations, along with voluntary social distancing by individuals and firms, would ease gradually through next year. in addition, the staff projection assumed that monetary policy would be even more accommodative than in the previous forecast in order to more fully reflect the revised consensus statement. altogether, the rate of real gdp growth was projected to exceed potential output growth, the unemployment rate was expected to decline considerably further, and inflation was forecast to pick back up in 2021 through 2023. with the more-accommodative monetary policy assumed in the current forecast, which reflected the recent consensus statement, inflation was projected to moderately overshoot 2 percent for some time in the years beyond 2023. the staff continued to observe that the uncertainty related to the course of the covid-19 pandemic and its associated economic effects was extremely elevated and that the risks to the outlook were still tilted to the downside. given the apparent resilience of the u.s. economy to the acceleration in the spread of the pandemic during the summer, the staff judged that a significantly more pessimistic economic outcome, which the staff had previously viewed as no less plausible than the baseline forecast and had featured a renewed downturn in economic activity, was now less likely than the baseline forecast. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2020 through 2023 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy—including the path for the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. these projections are described in the sep, which is an addendum to these minutes. participants noted that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. economic activity and employment had picked up in recent months but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year. weaker demand and significantly minutes of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 9  lower oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions had improved in recent months, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economy’s medium-term outlook. participants observed that the incoming data indicated that economic activity was recovering faster than expected from its depressed second-quarter level, when much of the economy was shut down to stem the spread of the virus. in particular, with the reopening of many businesses and fewer people withdrawing from social interactions, consumer spending was rebounding sharply and appeared to have recovered about three-fourths of its earlier decline. prior fiscal policy actions were seen as having supported the ability and willingness of households to spend, although most participants expressed concern about the expiration of the enhanced unemployment insurance benefits from the cares act (coronavirus aid, relief, and economic security act) and judged that additional fiscal relief would help sustain the recovery in household spending. indeed, many participants noted that their economic outlook assumed additional fiscal support and that if future fiscal support was significantly smaller or arrived significantly later than they expected, the pace of the recovery could be slower than anticipated. participants also viewed accommodative monetary policy as contributing to gains in residential investment as well as consumer purchases of motor vehicles and other durable goods. while participants pointed to strength in consumers’ purchases of goods, especially those sold online, they noted that outlays for services had been slower to recover, particularly for items such as air travel, hotel accommodations, and restaurant meals, which had been significantly disrupted by social-distancing measures. participants generally expected spending on these services to remain subdued for some time and thus to be a restraining factor on the pace of the recovery. a few participants raised the possibility that the unwinding of the large pool of household savings accumulated during the pandemic could provide greater-than-anticipated momentum to consumption going forward. however, a couple of other participants judged that if this savings reflected reduced spending on in-person services by high-income consumers, it was unlikely to provide much momentum to future consumption. participants noted that business investment, which had plummeted in the second quarter, appeared to have begun to turn around. they pointed to data showing gains in capital goods orders and shipments as well as improved business sentiment. a number of participants judged that low interest rates were supporting business investment. however, the recovery was viewed as unevenly distributed across industries. while many business contacts reported progress on adapting to the pandemic, others noted that industries that relied more on personto-person interactions continued to struggle. business contacts with ties to the motor vehicle or housing industries indicated increased activity, while those closer to the aviation, hospitality, and nonresidential construction industries were not seeing much of a recovery. contacts continued to report ongoing stresses in the energy sector, as well as challenges in the agricultural sector even though some crop prices had risen recently as sales to china increased. although business contacts indicated that overall business activity had been stronger than they expected, it remained well below pre-pandemic levels. business contacts pointed to several factors that could restrain further recovery, including high levels of uncertainty that were reportedly still holding back hiring and capital spending. some contacts reported difficulties in managing disruptions in supply chains as well as elevated levels of employee absenteeism because of the pandemic. additionally, district contacts indicated that fiscal policy had helped support small businesses, while federal aid payments had helped support farm incomes. participants observed that labor market conditions continued to improve in recent months and that the economy through august had regained roughly half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in march and april. the gains in employment over july and august were generally seen as larger than anticipated. participants judged, however, that the labor market was a long way from being fully recovered. they generally agreed that prospects for a further substantial improvement in the labor market would depend on a broad and sustained reopening of businesses, which in turn would depend importantly on how safe individuals felt to reengage in a wide range of activities. some participants noted that the majority of gains in employment so far reflected workers on temporary layoffs returning to work. these participants judged it as less likely for future job gains to continue at their recent pace, because a greater share of the remaining layoffs might become permanent. workers facing permanent layoffs were seen as more likely to need to find new jobs in different industries, and this process page 10 federal open market committee  could take time, especially to the extent that these workers needed to be retrained. participants observed that lower-paid workers had been disproportionally affected by the economic effects of the pandemic. many of these workers were employed in the service sector or other industries most adversely affected by social-distancing measures. with a disproportionate share of service-sector jobs held by african americans, hispanics, and women, these groups were seen as being especially hard hit by the economic hardships caused by the pandemic. participants viewed fiscal support from the cares act as having been very important in bolstering the financial situations of millions of families, and a number of participants judged that the absence of further fiscal support would exacerbate economic hardships in minority and lower-income communities. in addition, several participants observed that the effects of the pandemic were disrupting the supply of labor because of the need to care for children, many of whom were attending school virtually from home. in their comments about inflation, participants noted that consumer prices had increased more quickly than expected in recent months and that market-based measures of inflation compensation had increased moderately over the intermeeting period, although they remained low. the upturn in consumer prices was primarily attributed to price increases in sectors such as consumer durables in which demand had risen after experiencing a large decline earlier this spring. nevertheless, inflation remained subdued, and participants still generally judged that the overall effect of the pandemic on prices was disinflationary. while the outlook for inflation was viewed as highly uncertain, a number of participants projected that inflation would run below the committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective for a significant period before moving moderately above 2 percent for some time—consistent with the committee’s revised consensus statement. participants noted that financial conditions were generally accommodative and that actions by the federal reserve, including the establishment of emergency lending facilities in conjunction with the treasury, were supporting the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities. while these actions as well as prompt and forceful monetary policy measures in response to the pandemic were viewed as contributing to accommodative financial conditions, participants noted important differences in credit quality and credit availability across borrowers. while the pace of corporate downgrades was seen as having decreased significantly in recent months, the delinquency rates on business loans had risen noticeably. bank contacts reported ample capacity to lend to creditworthy borrowers; however, surveys of credit availability indicated that bank lending was tight. furthermore, several participants noted the stress that small- and medium-sized banks could face from defaults on loans to small businesses and cre properties if people continued to withdraw from travel and shopping activities. additionally, a couple of participants indicated that highly accommodative financial market conditions could lead to excessive risk-taking and to a buildup of financial imbalances. participants continued to see the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook as very elevated, with the path of the economy highly dependent on the course of the virus; on how individuals, businesses, and public officials responded to it; and on the effectiveness of public health measures to address it. participants cited several downside risks that could threaten the recovery. while the risk of another broad economic shutdown was seen as having receded, participants remained concerned about the possibility of additional virus outbreaks that could undermine the recovery. such scenarios could result in increases in bankruptcies and defaults, put stress on the financial system, and lead to disruptions in the flow of credit to households and businesses. most participants raised the concern that fiscal support so far for households, businesses, and state and local governments might not provide sufficient relief to these sectors. a couple of participants saw an upside risk that further fiscal stimulus could be larger than anticipated, though it might come later than had been expected. several participants raised concerns regarding the longer-run effects of the pandemic, including how it could lead to a restructuring in some sectors of the economy that could slow employment growth or could accelerate technological disruption that was likely limiting the pricing power of firms. in their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed that they were committed to using the federal reserve’s full range of tools in order to support the u.s. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. they also noted that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. minutes of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 11  all participants agreed that the completion of the framework review and the publication of the revised consensus statement provided a strong foundation for monetary policy decisions and communications going forward. accordingly, participants agreed that it would be appropriate to incorporate some key elements of the revised consensus statement into the fomc statement to be released following this meeting. in particular, participants reiterated their commitment to achieve maximum employment and an inflation rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation running persistently below its longer-run goal, participants judged that it would be appropriate to aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation would average 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations would remain well anchored at 2 percent. against this backdrop, participants discussed a range of issues associated with providing greater clarity about the likely path of the federal funds rate in the years ahead. most participants supported providing more explicit outcome-based forward guidance for the federal funds rate that included establishing criteria for lifting the federal funds rate above the elb in terms of the paths for employment or inflation or both. among the participants who favored providing more explicit forward guidance at this meeting, all but a couple supported a formulation in which the forward guidance included language indicating that it would likely be appropriate to maintain the current target range until labor market conditions were judged to be consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. these participants noted that communicating that the target range for the federal funds rate would remain at the elb until these criteria were achieved would provide appropriately clear and strong policy guidance. doing so at this meeting was viewed as an especially important way of affirming the committee’s commitment to achieving the economic outcomes articulated in the consensus statement. participants generally noted that outcome-based forward guidance for the federal funds rate of this type was not an unconditional commitment to a particular path. indeed, outcome-based guidance of this type would allow the public to infer changes in the committee’s assessment of how long the target range for the federal funds rate would remain at its current setting. information pointing to a weaker outlook for the economy and inflation would tend to lead to public expectations for a longer period at the current setting of the target range while information suggesting a stronger outlook for the economy and inflation would tend to lead to expectations for a shorter period at the current setting. in addition, circumstances could arise in which the committee judged that it would be appropriate to change its guidance, particularly if risks emerged that could impede the attainment of its economic objectives. a couple of participants preferred even stronger, and less qualified, outcome-based forward guidance that they judged would more clearly convey the committee’s commitment to its objectives and to the strategic approach that was articulated in the revised consensus statement. in particular, these participants preferred forward guidance in which the target range for the federal funds rate remained at the elb until inflation had moved above 2 percent for some time. especially in light of the lengthy period in which inflation has run below the committee’s longer-run 2 percent objective, these participants judged that it was critical to demonstrate the committee’s commitment to achieve outcomes in which inflation averages 2 percent over time. several participants noted that while they agreed it was appropriate to incorporate key elements of the consensus statement into the postmeeting statement, they preferred to retain forward guidance similar to that provided in recent fomc statements. these participants judged that it would likely be appropriate to maintain an accommodative stance of policy for some time in order to foster outcomes consistent with the committee’s revised consensus statement. however, with longer-term interest rates already very low, there did not appear to be a need for enhanced forward guidance at this juncture or much scope for forward guidance to put additional downward pressure on yields. moreover, these participants were concerned that forward guidance that involved the target range for the federal funds rate remaining at the elb until employment and inflation criteria were achieved could limit the committee’s flexibility for years. furthermore, by influencing expectations for the path of short-term interest rates, such guidance could contribute to a buildup of financial imbalances that would make it more difficult for the committee to achieve its objectives in the future. regarding asset purchases, participants judged that it would be appropriate over coming months for the federal reserve to increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs at least at the current pace. these actions would continue to help sustain smooth market functioning and would continue to help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the page 12 federal open market committee  flow of credit to households and businesses. some participants also noted that in future meetings it would be appropriate to further assess and communicate how the committee’s asset purchase program could best support the achievement of the committee’s maximumemployment and price-stability goals. participants widely echoed the remarks at the opening of the meeting in memory of thomas laubach. participants universally recognized his great leadership and intellectual contributions to the work of the committee as well as his warm and generous spirit. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. they noted that economic activity and employment had picked up in recent months but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year, and that weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. overall, financial conditions had improved in recent months, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. members also stated that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus. in addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and was posing considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. all members agreed to incorporate into the postmeeting statement key elements of the committee’s revised statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. members judged that this action would underscore the committee’s strong commitment to the goals and strategy articulated in the new consensus statement in pursuit of the committee’s statutory objectives. accordingly, members agreed that the fomc statement should note that the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and that, with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. members generally expected that it would be appropriate to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes were achieved. all members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. almost all members viewed this meeting as the appropriate time to modify forward guidance to provide greater clarity regarding the likely future path of the federal funds rate. to this end, almost all members agreed on a specification for outcome-based forward guidance that indicated that the committee expects that it will be appropriate to maintain the current setting of the target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to run moderately in excess of 2 percent for some time. two members dissented from the policy decision. one of these dissenting members preferred that the committee retain greater policy rate flexibility by retaining the language in the forward guidance provided in the july postmeeting statement; that language noted that it would be appropriate to maintain the current target range until the committee was confident that the economy had weathered recent events and was on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. the other dissenting member preferred a stronger formulation for the forward guidance—one in which the committee would indicate that it expected to maintain the current target range until core inflation had reached 2 percent on a sustained basis. in their discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead, members generally agreed that the committee’s policy guidance expressed its assessment about the path for the federal funds rate most likely to be consistent with achievement of the committee’s goals, but that it was not an unconditional commitment. they stated that the appropriate rate path would depend on the evolution of the economic outlook. accordingly, they agreed that the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. members noted that the committee’s asset purchases had helped foster significant improvements in market functioning over recent months. in addition, purchases minutes of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 13  of securities were contributing to accommodative financial conditions in a way that supported economic recovery. consistent with these observations, members agreed that it would be appropriate to acknowledge in the postmeeting statement the role of asset purchases in supporting accommodative financial conditions. the committee’s statement thus indicated that over coming months it would be appropriate for the federal reserve to increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning and to help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. members considered the staff proposal to eliminate the requirement in the directive to increase the holdings of agency cmbs in the soma portfolio. in light of the substantial improvement in market functioning in the agency cmbs market, the committee judged that it would be appropriate for the desk to purchase agency cmbs only as needed to sustain smooth market functioning, rather than seek to steadily increase agency cmbs holdings, and to cease reinvestments of agency cmbs principal payments. members also concluded that, in light of ongoing low take-up at desk repo operations, it was not necessary to include a sentence on these operations in the fomc statement. however, the directive adopted by the committee continued to direct the desk to conduct overnight and term repo operations to support effective policy implementation and smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective september 17, 2020, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) at the current pace. increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. • • • • • conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs. allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. the covid-19 pandemic is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. economic activity and employment have picked up in recent months but remain well below their levels at the beginning of the year. weaker demand and significantly lower oil prices are holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions have improved in recent months, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy will depend significantly on the course of the virus. the ongoing public health crisis will continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. page 14 federal open market committee  the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. the committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, over coming months the federal reserve will increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, patrick harker, loretta j. mester, and randal k. quarles. voting against this action: robert s. kaplan and neel kashkari. president kaplan dissented because he expects that it will be appropriate to maintain the current target range until the committee is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals as articulated in its new policy strategy statement, but prefers that the committee retain greater policy rate flexibility beyond that point. president kashkari dissented because he prefers that the committee indicate that it expects to maintain the current target range until core inflation has reached 2 percent on a sustained basis. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective september 17, 2020. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on wednesday–thursday, november 4– 5, 2020. the meeting adjourned at 11:00 a.m. on september 16, 2020. notation votes by notation vote completed on august 18, 2020, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on july 28–29, 2020. by notation vote completed on august 27, 2020, the committee unanimously approved updates to its statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. in conjunction with the notation vote, all nonvoting participants also expressed support for the updated statement.  james a. clouse secretary page 1  summary of economic projections in conjunction with the federal open market committee (fomc) meeting held on september 15–16, 2020, meeting participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (gdp) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2020 to 2023 and over the longer run. each participant’s projections were based on information available at the time of the meeting, together with her or his assessment of appropriate monetary policy— including a path for the federal funds rate and its longerrun value—and assumptions about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. the longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the value to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. 1 “appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. the current projections for real activity, the labor market, and inflation were notably stronger than the projections in the june 2020 summary of economic projections (sep) for the overlapping years from 2020 to 2022. participants revised up their economic outlook in light of the stronger-than-expected rebound in economic activity over recent months, although they noted that they remained attentive to the effects of the covid-19 pandemic and the measures taken to contain it. table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections. almost all participants projected that real gdp will contract in 2020, with the median participant seeing a milder contraction relative to the median projection in the june sep. additionally, almost all participants projected that real gdp would grow faster than their estimates of its longer-run normal growth rate from 2021 to 2023. all participants projected that the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2020 would be notably lower than they had projected in june and that the unemployment rate would decline gradually during the forecast period. most participants expected that a full economic recovery would take some time, and many projected that the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2023 would be 1 one participant did not submit longer-run projections for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate. slightly below its estimated longer-run level. a vast majority of participants projected that total inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce), would be at or below the fomc’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective throughout the forecast period. projections for core pce price inflation, which excludes consumer food and energy prices, generally followed a similar trajectory. as shown in figure 2, most participants indicated that their expectations regarding the evolution of the economy, relative to the committee’s maximumemployment and price-stability objectives, would likely warrant keeping the federal funds rate at its current level through at least the end of 2023. the median of participants’ assessments of the longer-run level for the federal funds rate was unchanged from its value in the june sep. amid uncertainty about the course of the pandemic and its effects on the economy, all participants continued to regard the uncertainties surrounding the economic outlook as higher than the average over the past 20 years. in addition, a substantial majority of participants assessed the risks to their outlook for real gdp growth as weighted to the downside and the risks to their unemployment rate projections as weighted to the upside. the risks to inflation projections were judged as weighted to the downside by a substantial majority of participants. the outlook for real gdp growth and the unemployment rate as shown in figure 3.a, almost all participants continued to project that real gdp would decline in 2020, with the median projection anticipating a decrease of 3.7 percent. nevertheless, these projections were substantially stronger than those from the june sep, when the median participant expected real gdp to contract 6.5 percent. these revisions, in part, reflect the stronger-thanexpected incoming data since june. almost all participants expected that the rate of real gdp growth from 2021 to 2023 would be above their estimates of its longer-run pace, with the median projections being 4.0 percent, 3.0 percent, and 2.5 percent in these years, respectively. the distribution of estimates of real gdp page 2 federal open market committee   table 1. economic projections of federal reserve board members and federal reserve bank presidents, under their individual assumptions of projected appropriate monetary policy, september 2020 percent central tendency2 median1 variable 2020 2021 2022 2023 longer run change in real gdp june projection -3.7 -6.5 4.0 5.0 3.0 3.5 2.5 unemployment rate june projection 7.6 9.3 5.5 6.5 4.6 5.5 pce inflation june projection 1.2 0.8 1.7 1.6 core pce inflation4 june projection 1.5 1.0 0.1 0.1 range3 2020 2021 2022 2023 longer run 2020 2021 2022 2023 longer run 1.9 1.8 -4.0– -3.0 -7.6– -5.5 3.6–4.7 4.5–6.0 2.5–3.3 3.0–4.5 2.4–3.0 1.7–2.0 1.7–2.0 -5.5–1.0 -10.0– -4.2 0.0–5.5 -1.0–7.0 2.0–4.5 2.0–6.0 2.0–4.0 1.6–2.2 1.6–2.2 4.0 4.1 4.1 7.0–8.0 9.0–10.0 5.0–6.2 5.9–7.5 4.0–5.0 4.8–6.1 3.5–4.4 3.9–4.3 4.0–4.3 6.5–8.0 7.0–14.0 4.0–8.0 4.5–12.0 3.5–7.5 4.0–8.0 3.5–6.0 3.5–4.7 3.5–4.7 1.8 1.7 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.1–1.3 0.6–1.0 1.6–1.9 1.4–1.7 1.7–1.9 1.6–1.8 1.9–2.0 2.0 2.0 1.0–1.5 0.5–1.2 1.3–2.4 1.1–2.0 1.5–2.2 1.4–2.2 1.7–2.1 2.0 2.0 1.7 1.5 1.8 1.7 2.0 1.3–1.5 0.9–1.1 1.6–1.8 1.4–1.7 1.7–1.9 1.6–1.8 1.9–2.0 1.2–1.6 0.7–1.3 1.5–2.4 1.2–2.0 1.6–2.2 1.2–2.2 1.7–2.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1–0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1–0.6 0.1–1.1 0.1–1.4 memo: projected appropriate policy path federal funds rate june projection 2.5 2.5 2.3–2.5 2.3–2.5 note: projections of change in real gross domestic product (gdp) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. pce inflation and core pce inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce) and the price index for pce excluding food and energy. projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. the projections for the federal funds rate are the value of the midpoint of the projected appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the projected appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. the june projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the federal open market committee on june 9–10, 2020. one participant did not submit longer-run projections for the change in real gdp, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds rate in conjunction with the june 9–10, 2020, meeting, and one participant did not submit such projections in conjunction with the september 15–16, 2020, meeting. 1. for each period, the median is the middle projection when the projections are arranged from lowest to highest. when the number of projections is even, the median is the average of the two middle projections. 2. the central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year. 3. the range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. 4. longer-run projections for core pce inflation are not collected. 2.0–3.0 2.0–3.0 summary of economic projections of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 3  figure 1. medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2020–23 and over the longer run percent change in real gdp 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 −1 −2 −3 −4 −5 −6 actual median of projections central tendency of projections range of projections 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 longer run percent unemployment rate 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 longer run percent pce inflation 3 2 1 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 longer run percent core pce inflation 3 2 1 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 longer run note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. the data for the actual values of the variables are annual. page 4 federal open market committee  figure 2. fomc participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate percent 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 2020 2021 2022 2023 longer run note: each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate at the end of the specified calendar year or over the longer run. one participant did not submit longer-run projections for the federal funds rate. summary of economic projections of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 5   figure 3.a. distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real gdp, 2020–23 and over the longer run number of participants 2020 −10.2− −10.1 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 september projections june projections −9.6− −9.5 −9.0− −8.9 −8.4− −8.3 −7.8− −7.7 −7.2− −7.1 −6.6− −6.5 −6.0− −5.9 −5.4− −5.3 −4.8− −4.7 −4.2− −4.1 −3.6− −3.5 −3.0− −2.9 −2.4− −2.3 −1.8− −1.7 −1.2− −1.1 −0.6− −0.5 0.0− 0.1 0.6− 0.7 1.2− 1.3 1.8− 1.9 2.4− 2.5 3.0− 3.1 3.6− 3.7 4.2− 4.3 4.8− 4.9 5.4− 5.5 6.0− 6.1 6.6− 6.7 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2021 −10.2− −10.1 −9.6− −9.5 −9.0− −8.9 −8.4− −8.3 −7.8− −7.7 −7.2− −7.1 −6.6− −6.5 −6.0− −5.9 −5.4− −5.3 −4.8− −4.7 −4.2− −4.1 −3.6− −3.5 −3.0− −2.9 −2.4− −2.3 −1.8− −1.7 −1.2− −1.1 −0.6− −0.5 0.0− 0.1 0.6− 0.7 1.2− 1.3 1.8− 1.9 2.4− 2.5 3.0− 3.1 3.6− 3.7 4.2− 4.3 4.8− 4.9 5.4− 5.5 6.0− 6.1 6.6− 6.7 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2022 −10.2− −10.1 −9.6− −9.5 −9.0− −8.9 −8.4− −8.3 −7.8− −7.7 −7.2− −7.1 −6.6− −6.5 −6.0− −5.9 −5.4− −5.3 −4.8− −4.7 −4.2− −4.1 −3.6− −3.5 −3.0− −2.9 −2.4− −2.3 −1.8− −1.7 −1.2− −1.1 −0.6− −0.5 0.0− 0.1 0.6− 0.7 1.2− 1.3 1.8− 1.9 2.4− 2.5 3.0− 3.1 3.6− 3.7 4.2− 4.3 4.8− 4.9 5.4− 5.5 6.0− 6.1 6.6− 6.7 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2023 −10.2− −10.1 −9.6− −9.5 −9.0− −8.9 −8.4− −8.3 −7.8− −7.7 −7.2− −7.1 −6.6− −6.5 −6.0− −5.9 −5.4− −5.3 −4.8− −4.7 −4.2− −4.1 −3.6− −3.5 −3.0− −2.9 −2.4− −2.3 −1.8− −1.7 −1.2− −1.1 −0.6− −0.5 0.0− 0.1 0.6− 0.7 1.2− 1.3 1.8− 1.9 2.4− 2.5 3.0− 3.1 3.6− 3.7 4.2− 4.3 4.8− 4.9 5.4− 5.5 6.0− 6.1 6.6− 6.7 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 longer run −10.2− −10.1 −9.6− −9.5 −9.0− −8.9 −8.4− −8.3 −7.8− −7.7 −7.2− −7.1 −6.6− −6.5 −6.0− −5.9 −5.4− −5.3 −4.8− −4.7 −4.2− −4.1 −3.6− −3.5 −3.0− −2.9 −2.4− −2.3 −1.8− −1.7 −1.2− −1.1 percent range note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. −0.6− −0.5 0.0− 0.1 0.6− 0.7 1.2− 1.3 1.8− 1.9 2.4− 2.5 3.0− 3.1 3.6− 3.7 4.2− 4.3 4.8− 4.9 5.4− 5.5 6.0− 6.1 6.6− 6.7 page 6 federal open market committee  growth in the longer run was little changed from the june sep, although the median projection ticked up to 1.9 percent. reflecting better-than-expected incoming data since june, participants revised down their projections for the unemployment rate considerably through 2022, the forecast period in the june sep (figure 3.b). the projections for the unemployment rate in the final quarter of this year ranged from 6.5 to 8.0 percent, with a median of 7.6 percent, and the ranges for projections from 2020 to 2022 all narrowed considerably since june. the median projected levels of the unemployment rate in the final quarters of 2021 and 2022—at 5.5 percent and 4.6 percent, respectively—were above the median estimate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment of 4.1 percent. however, the median projection of the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2023, at 4.0 percent, was slightly below the median estimate of its longer-run value. the distribution of estimates for the longer-run unemployment rate was unchanged from the june sep. many participants indicated that they were still assessing whether the sharp contraction in economic activity during the first half of this year was likely to leave a lasting imprint on the labor market or the productive capacity of the economy. the outlook for inflation as shown in figures 3.c and 3.d, almost all participants revised up their projections for inflation in 2020 relative to their june projections, with the median projections for total and core inflation at 1.2 percent and 1.5 percent, respectively. most participants expected inflation to rise over the next three years, although about half of them expected pce price inflation to still fall short of the committee’s longer-run 2 percent inflation objective by the end of the forecast horizon. a few participants projected inflation to move above 2 percent before returning to 2 percent by 2023. a few participants expected inflation to move above its longer-run level in 2023, and several participants mentioned that they would expect inflation to rise above 2 percent in the years after. as a reference, table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the change in real gdp, the unemployment rate, and total consumer price inflation over the period from 2000 through 2019. at the end of this summary, the box “forecast uncertainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections. 2 appropriate monetary policy as shown in figure 3.e, most participants projected that it would be appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent through at least the end of 2023. most participants noted that their assessment of appropriate monetary policy took into account the new statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. in particular, because inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, participants mentioned that they linked their assessment of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate to their assessment of shortfalls of employment from the committee’s maximum-employment objective and to a moderate rise in inflation above 2 percent to help anchor inflation expectations at the committee’s 2 percent longerrun goal. the median of participants’ estimates of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate was unchanged from june at 2.50 percent. uncertainty and risks in assessing the appropriate path for monetary policy, fomc participants take account of the range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should they occur. as shown in the panels on the left side of figure 4, almost all participants continued to view the current uncertainty surrounding each of the four economic variables—real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, total pce inflation, and core pce inflation—as being greater than the average over the past 20 years. 2 a substantial majority of participants judged the risks to their projections for real gdp growth as weighted to the downside and the risks to their unemployment rate projections as weighted to the upside (figure 4). a substantial majority of participants viewed the risks to their inflation projections as weighted to the downside. in discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their economic projections, the course of the pandemic continued to be mentioned as a key source of uncertainty. the possibility of another wave of contagion and delays in developing a vaccine were seen as potential downside risks to the economic outlook. as for upside risks, participants mentioned the possibility of faster-thanprevious sep addendums to the fomc minutes contained figures showing the median projections along with confidence intervals based on historical forecast errors. as the level of uncertainty about the economic outlook is currently judged to be higher than its historical average because of uncertainty about the course of the coronavirus and its effects on the economy, these “fan charts” have been omitted from this addendum. summary of economic projections of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 7   figure 3.b. distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2020–23 and over the longer run number of participants 2020 3.0− 3.1 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 september projections june projections 3.6− 3.7 4.2− 4.3 4.8− 4.9 5.4− 5.5 6.0− 6.1 6.6− 6.7 7.2− 7.3 7.8− 7.9 8.4− 8.5 9.0− 9.1 9.6− 9.7 10.2− 10.3 10.8− 10.9 11.4− 11.5 12.0− 12.1 12.6− 12.7 13.2− 13.3 13.8− 13.9 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2021 3.0− 3.1 3.6− 3.7 4.2− 4.3 4.8− 4.9 5.4− 5.5 6.0− 6.1 6.6− 6.7 7.2− 7.3 7.8− 7.9 8.4− 8.5 9.0− 9.1 9.6− 9.7 10.2− 10.3 10.8− 10.9 11.4− 11.5 12.0− 12.1 12.6− 12.7 13.2− 13.3 13.8− 13.9 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2022 3.0− 3.1 3.6− 3.7 4.2− 4.3 4.8− 4.9 5.4− 5.5 6.0− 6.1 6.6− 6.7 7.2− 7.3 7.8− 7.9 8.4− 8.5 9.0− 9.1 9.6− 9.7 10.2− 10.3 10.8− 10.9 11.4− 11.5 12.0− 12.1 12.6− 12.7 13.2− 13.3 13.8− 13.9 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2023 3.0− 3.1 3.6− 3.7 4.2− 4.3 4.8− 4.9 5.4− 5.5 6.0− 6.1 6.6− 6.7 7.2− 7.3 7.8− 7.9 8.4− 8.5 9.0− 9.1 9.6− 9.7 10.2− 10.3 10.8− 10.9 11.4− 11.5 12.0− 12.1 12.6− 12.7 13.2− 13.3 13.8− 13.9 percent range number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 longer run 3.0− 3.1 3.6− 3.7 4.2− 4.3 4.8− 4.9 5.4− 5.5 6.0− 6.1 6.6− 6.7 7.2− 7.3 7.8− 7.9 8.4− 8.5 9.0− 9.1 percent range note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 9.6− 9.7 10.2− 10.3 10.8− 10.9 11.4− 11.5 12.0− 12.1 12.6− 12.7 13.2− 13.3 13.8− 13.9 page 8 federal open market committee  figure 3.c. distribution of participants’ projections for pce inflation, 2020–23 and over the longer run number of participants 2020 september projections june projections 0.3− 0.4 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.3− 0.4 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants 2022 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.3− 0.4 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants 2023 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.3− 0.4 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.3− 0.4 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 percent range note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 summary of economic projections of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 9  figure 3.d. distribution of participants’ projections for core pce inflation, 2020–23 number of participants 2020 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 september projections june projections 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants 2022 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 percent range number of participants 2023 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.5− 0.6 0.7− 0.8 0.9− 1.0 1.1− 1.2 1.3− 1.4 1.5− 1.6 1.7− 1.8 1.9− 2.0 percent range note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 2.1− 2.2 2.3− 2.4 page 10 federal open market committee  figure 3.e. distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2020–23 and over the longer run number of participants 2020 september projections june projections 0.13− 0.37 0.38− 0.62 0.63− 0.87 0.88− 1.12 1.13− 1.37 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 2.63− 2.87 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 2.88− 3.12 percent range number of participants 2021 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.13− 0.37 0.38− 0.62 0.63− 0.87 0.88− 1.12 1.13− 1.37 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 percent range number of participants 2022 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.13− 0.37 0.38− 0.62 0.63− 0.87 0.88− 1.12 1.13− 1.37 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 percent range number of participants 2023 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.13− 0.37 0.38− 0.62 0.63− 0.87 0.88− 1.12 1.13− 1.37 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 2.38− 2.62 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 percent range number of participants longer run 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0.13− 0.37 0.38− 0.62 0.63− 0.87 0.88− 1.12 1.13− 1.37 1.38− 1.62 1.63− 1.87 1.88− 2.12 2.13− 2.37 percent range note: definitions of variables and other explanations are in the notes to table 1. 2.38− 2.62 2.63− 2.87 2.88− 3.12 summary of economic projections of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 11  figure 4. uncertainty and risks in economic projections number of participants number of participants uncertainty about gdp growth risks to gdp growth september projections june projections lower 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 broadly similar higher september projections june projections weighted to downside broadly balanced number of participants 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 weighted to upside number of participants uncertainty about the unemployment rate risks to the unemployment rate 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 lower broadly similar higher 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 weighted to downside broadly balanced number of participants weighted to upside number of participants uncertainty about pce inflation risks to pce inflation 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 lower broadly similar higher 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 weighted to downside broadly balanced number of participants weighted to upside number of participants uncertainty about core pce inflation risks to core pce inflation 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 lower broadly similar higher 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 weighted to downside broadly balanced weighted to upside page 12 federal open market committee  table 2. average historical projection error ranges percentage points 2020 2021 2022 2023 change in real gdp1 . . . . . . ±1.1 variable ±1.7 ±1.8 ±1.9 ±0.3 ±1.1 ±1.6 ±1.9 ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.0 . . . ±0.5 ±1.7 ±2.3 ±2.7 unemployment rate1 total consumer prices2 short-term interest ...... .... rates3 note: error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean squared error of projections for 2000 through 2019 that were released in the fall by various private and government forecasters. as described in the box “forecast uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real gdp, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. for more information, see david reifschneider and peter tulip (2017), “gauging the uncertainty of the economic outlook using historical forecasting errors: the federal reserve’s approach,” finance and economics discussion series 2017-020 (washington: board of governors of the federal reserve system, february), . 1. definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. 2. measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts. projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth quarter basis. 3. for federal reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds rate. for other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month treasury bills. projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the fourth quarter. anticipated progress in dealing with the disease and better-targeted measures in responding to the virus. participants also pointed to a number of other risks, including the extent and timing of additional fiscal support, the magnitude of supply-side disruptions associated with postponements of in-class school openings and small business closings, the likelihood of elevated levels of business bankruptcies, and credit quality problems that could potentially curtail lending. several participants also expressed concerns about global geopolitical developments and related tensions as well as prolonged recessionary dynamics such as labor market scarring or inflation persistently undershooting the committee’s longerrun goal. participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable uncertainty. because the committee adjusts monetary policy in response to actual and prospective developments over time in key economic variables—such as real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation— uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the federal funds rate importantly reflects the uncertainties about the paths for these economic variables, along with other factors. as with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial. summary of economic projections of the meeting of september 15–16, 2020 page 13  forecast uncertainty the economic projections provided by the members of the board of governors and the presidents of the federal reserve banks inform discussions of monetary policy among policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis for policy actions. considerable uncertainty attends these projections, however. the economic and statistical models and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen developments and events. thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur. table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those reported in past monetary policy reports and those prepared by the federal reserve board’s staff in advance of meetings of the federal open market committee. the projection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated with economic forecasts. for example, suppose a participant projects that real gross domestic product (gdp) and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. if the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual gdp would expand within a range of 1.9 to 4.1 percent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the second year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the third year, and 1.1 to 4.9 percent in the fourth year. the corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second year, 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the fourth year. because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2. that is, participants judge whether each economic variable is more likely to be above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. these judgments about the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection rather than with divergences across a number of different projections. as with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. this uncertainty arises primarily because each participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation over time. if economic conditions evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that point forward. the final line in table 2 shows the error ranges for forecasts of shortterm interest rates. they suggest that the historical confidence intervals associated with projections of the federal funds rate are quite wide. it should be noted, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly consistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly outcomes but rather are projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-ofyear basis. however, the forecast errors should provide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the economy. 
e november 5, 2020 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us—maximum employment and price stability. since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. today my colleagues on the federal open market committee and i reaffirmed our commitment to support the economy in this challenging time. economic activity has continued to recover from its depressed second-quarter level. the reopening of the economy led to a rapid rebound in activity, and real gdp rose at an annual rate of 33 percent in the third quarter. in recent months, however, the pace of improvement has moderated. household spending on goods, especially durable goods, has been strong and has moved above its pre-pandemic level. in contrast, spending on services remains low, largely due to ongoing weakness in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. the overall rebound in household spending owes, in part, to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided essential support to many families and individuals. the housing sector has fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. business investment has also picked up. even so, overall economic activity remains well below its level before the pandemic, and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. in the labor market, roughly half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in march and april have been regained, as many people were able to return to work. as with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market has moderated. the unemployment rate declined over the past five months but remained elevated at 7.9 percent as of september.  although we welcome this progress, we will not lose sight of the millions of americans who remain out of work. the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. in particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the services sector, for women, and for african americans and hispanics. the economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. the pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. following large declines in the spring, consumer prices picked up over the summer, in part reflecting a rise in durable goods prices. however, for those sectors that have been most affected by the pandemic, prices remain particularly soft. overall, on a 12-month basis, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer-run objective. as we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the outlook for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on the success of efforts to keep the virus in check. the recent rise in new covid-19 cases, both here in the united states and abroad, is particularly concerning. all of us have a role to play in our nation’s response to the pandemic. following the advice of public health professionals to keep appropriate social distances and to wear masks in public will help get the economy back to full strength. a full economic recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it’s safe to reengage in a broad range of activities. the federal reserve’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. as noted in our statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, we view maximum employment as a “broad-based and inclusive goal.” our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on  having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. as we said in september and again today, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. with regard to interest rates, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, over coming months we will continue to increase our holdings of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace. these asset purchases are intended to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. at this meeting, my colleagues and i discussed our asset purchases and the role they are playing in supporting the recovery. at the current pace, our holdings of securities are rising at a substantial rate of $120 billion per month—$80 billion per month of treasuries and $40 billion per month of agency mbs. we believe these purchases, along with the very large purchases made to preserve financial stability in the depths of the crisis, have materially eased financial conditions and are providing substantial support to the economy. looking ahead, we will continue to monitor developments and assess how our ongoing asset purchases can best support our maximum- employment and price-stability objectives as well as market functioning and financial stability.  the federal reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. preserving the flow of credit is essential for mitigating damage to the economy and promoting a robust recovery. many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the treasury department and are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. these programs serve as a backstop to key credit markets and have helped to restore the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. we have deployed these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from congress and the treasury. when the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the toolbox. as i have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. the fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. we can only create programs or facilities with broad-based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. many borrowers are benefiting from these programs, as is the overall economy. but for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. in these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. the fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe in our lifetimes. it will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of this year, and it may take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that.  i’d like to mention a couple of changes that we plan on making to our summary of economic projections beginning in december. first, we will release the entire package of sep materials at the same time that the fomc statement comes out. previously, some of these materials were released three weeks after the meeting as part of the minutes. this step will make more information available at the time of our policy announcements, including the distributions of forecasts and how participants judge the uncertainty and risks that attend their projections. second, we will add two new graphs that show how the balance of participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks have evolved over time. these changes to the sep will provide a timely perspective on the risks and uncertainties that surround the modal or baseline projections, thereby highlighting some of the risk-management considerations that are relevant for monetary policy. to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. rachel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. it’s rachel siegel from the washington post. thanks very much for taking my question. i’m wondering if you can speak specifically about what indicators you’re seeing that suggest the pace of improvement has moderated, including in the labor market, and how correlated those indicators are to the recent rise in covid cases that we’ve seen going into flu season. thank you. chair powell. sure. so, of course. let’s start with february. in february, we had an economy that was performing well. then the pandemic hit, and we had a record decline in  activity in march and april, and then we had a record bounceback in may and june. and so as i think would have been expected and was expected, the pace of improvement from may and june has now moderated, so it’s not unexpected. and i think if you look at just about anything, you know, for example, the payroll readings, the payroll job gains in may and june were just outsized. and they’re certainly still very large, but they’ve—but the pace of improvement has moderated. that’s the case for, for all different measures in the labor force—in the labor market, rather. another would be claims. just about all the data were—showed a big bounceback. but then, as you would expect, when, when you sort of had people—a lot of people go back to work at once, the pace will moderate. same thing with economic activity. most forecasts call for, you know, still a significant growth in the fourth quarter but not at the 33 percent annualized pace that we had in the third quarter. so, in a sense, that would be—that would be as expected. we have been concerned that the downside risks, though, are, are prevalent now, which are—which are really the risk of the further spread of the disease and also the risk that, that households will run through the savings they’ve managed to accumulate on their balance sheet and that that could weigh on activity. but what we see up to the present, really, is, continued growth, continued expansion, but at, at a gradually moderating pace. michelle smith. thank you. marty crutsinger, associated press. martin crutsinger. thank you. could you talk a little bit about where you think the stimulus package that is being debated in congress is and how severe a threat that could be to the economy if it does not get passed, say, before january? chair powell. so it is—obviously, it’s for congress to decide the timing, size, and components of further fiscal support for the economy, and i will say that the support provided by the cares act was absolutely essential in supporting the recovery that we’ve seen so far, which  has generally exceeded expectations. and i do think it’s likely that further support is likely to be needed for monetary policy and fiscal policy. i just mentioned the two risks that i think we, we face, and those would be well addressed through more fiscal policy. one is the further spread of the virus, and the other is the lapsing of the cares act benefits and the savings on people’s balance sheets that will dwindle. but i, you know, i think it’s appropriate for us not to try to prescribe for congress exactly what they should do or what the timing of it should be or what the size of it should be and leave it at that. michelle smith. nick timiraos. nick timiraos. thanks, chair powell. nick timiraos at the wall street journal. to follow on marty’s question, you really have been saying since april that more is needed on the fiscal policy front, and yet we don’t seem to be that much closer than we were in the spring or the summer to additional spending. two questions: would the lack of fiscal support compel the fed to provide additional accommodation, and are you and your colleagues being more vocal about the need for fiscal support because the capacity for monetary policy to support growth is diminished here, given the low level of short- and long-term rates? thank you. chair powell. so on your first question, you know, we’ll take into account all external factors and, and do what we think we need to do with the tools that we have to pursue our goals. that’s what we will do. and i’ve said it on a couple of occasions that that will go better and move more quickly if we have a broad set of policies from across the government. and we’ve said this in the very beginning: it’s really, first and foremost, health-care policy, getting the—getting the spread of the virus under control and working on therapeutics and vaccines and that kind of thing, getting—so that—those are absolutely critical to the economy. now, those are important, as well as health policies. they’re, they’re going to be critical to the  economy. fiscal policy can do what we can’t, which is to replace lost incomes for people who are out of work through no fault of their own. and then we—what we can do is, we can obviously support financial stability through our lending programs, and, and we can support demand through, through interest rates and asset purchases and that sort of thing. so we’re, we’re going to take the economy as it comes, including all external factors. so i think all of us lived through the experience of the—of the years after the global financial crisis. and for a number of years there, in the middle of the recovery, fiscal policy was pretty tight. and. and i think i just would say that i think we’ll have a stronger recovery if we can just get at least some more fiscal support when it’s appropriate, you know, when it’s appropriate and in the size congress thinks is appropriate. i do think that that will likely—and, by the way, you see, you know, a lot of discussion on both sides of the aisle, on both sides of the hill that suggests generally that there will be something. michelle smith. thank you. steve liesman, cnbc. steve liesman. thank you. mr. chairman, also to follow up on sort of what nick was talking about, two questions about quantitative easing. the first is, if the market is functioning better, as you and other fed officials have said, and qe right now is designed for smooth market functioning, why haven’t you reduced qe that you’re doing if the market is functioning better already? the second question i have is, what good, for the broader economy, would additional qe do at this point, given that interest rates are already low and don’t seem to be rising even above 1 percent? thank you. chair powell. so, on the first—the first question, it’s—our asset purchases are serving both purchases, both—sorry, both purposes: financial market function and support for economic activity. so—and that’s really been true—i think in the very beginning of the crisis,  the main focus was, obviously, financial, financial market function, particularly in, in, you know, some of the major markets. but after that period, we’ve, we’ve understood all along that our purchases are also supporting economic activity, and that’s important. and that need hasn’t dwindled at all. so, so we haven’t looked at reducing purchases. so in terms of what they can do, first i would just say, the purchases that we have in place are providing strong support to economic activity still. and, by the way, they’re sustaining the gains we’ve made in financial stability. you know, we don’t—we don’t take anything for granted. we, we don’t expect that things will deteriorate. but, nonetheless, we have a habit of keeping things in place for a while. so we’re not taking our gains in financial market function for granted, although, admittedly, they’ve been very large. so the asset purchases are just another very important piece of the accommodative policy stance that we have. and, you know, as you know, these—we’re buying $120 billion a month. that’s $1.44 trillion, if i remember my times tables. and it’s just providing a lot of support for, for economic activity and, by the way, removing just about the same amount of duration risk from private hands as qe3 did. so this is a big program, and it’s doing a lot of good. and we also, today, you know, we had a full discussion of the options around quantitative ease—not quantitative easing, the asset purchase program, and, you know, we understand the, the ways in which we can adjust the parameters of it to deliver more accommodation if it turns out to be appropriate. right now, we think that this very large, effective program is delivering about the right amount of accommodation and support for the markets, and so it continues. michelle smith. thank you. craig torres, bloomberg. craig torres. hi, chair powell. first, it’s great to see you’re okay. chair powell, what is the risk that we come out of this with lower productivity; weaker labor force attachment;  slower growth; and, important for your tools, chair powell, a cycle of lower real interest rates? and if you think this type of scarring is a risk, then i’m wondering, what’s stopping the federal reserve from having a more explicit dialogue with congress about the particular types of fiscal support we might need to avoid this outcome to make sure that you push away from the zero boundary or that the economy does when we exit this? thanks. chair powell. thank you. so you did—you laid out nicely the, the risks of damage to the supply side of the economy, or “scarring,” as you put it. and we’ve been talking about those since the very beginning of the pandemic. the risk is that, for example, people are out of the labor force for an extended period of time. they lose their attachment to the labor force, and it’s harder to get back. your skills atrophy. it’s harder to get back in. and the record is, if you don’t get back in very fairly quickly, it can be harder to get back in. and that holds down the whole economy. and, by the way, it also—it places enormous burdens on individuals who may have this happen to them at an important stage in their career. so it’s, it’s, it’s important. and, you know—so that is one of the reasons why our response was so strong and so urgent at the beginning and why we called this, this set of risks out. i don’t know how we could be much more vocal about it than we have been. fortunately, for—you know, the economic recovery has exceeded, certainly, the downside cases that we were very concerned about and even, even exceeded—sort of exceeded the baseline expectations. now, that’s so far. we are a long way from our goals. and, you know, we’re, we’re sort of halfway there on the labor market recovery at best. and, and there are parts of the economy where it’s going to be hard until there’s a vaccine—you know, the parts of the economy. so, you know, that’s the supply-side damage. that’s sort of the third thing that we talk about. the first, at the beginning, it was to provide relief and comfort. the second—then the second part was to  provide support when—to the expansion when it came. and the third was to avoid longer-run damage to the economy, and that’s, that’s all of these things. i think we have been vocal. you know, we’ll, we’ll try to continue to do that. and, and those are—that’s again—that goes to keeping this episode as short as it can be and avoiding unnecessary business bankruptcies, unnecessary household bankruptcies, and unnecessary long- term stays of unemployment or supporting people through them so that they can maintain their financial footing and their lives and be able to go back to work in a productive way. it’s, it’s very important that—you know, there is a real threat here of those things, and, and, you know, we’re trying to do everything we can to minimize that threat. michelle smith. [inaudible] jeanna smialek. [inaudible] —look like and whether you anticipate any consequences if they are not extended? chair powell. yes, thanks. so, first, let me say, we do think that the facilities have, have generally served their purposes well, particularly in supporting the flow of credit, particularly acting as backstops to private markets. so, overall, we think that the, the programs have, have gone well. in terms of the extension, we are, we are just now turning to that question. you know, we’ve had a lot of things to work our way through. right now we’re just in the process of turning to that question and, of course, not made any decisions. and in terms of the process, this is a decision that, of course, we have to make and will make jointly with the treasury department. michelle smith. thank you. david gura. david gura. [inaudible] imf chief economist gita gopinath wrote—gita gopinath wrote a piece this week in which she said, unequivocally, we’re in a global liquidity trap and  talked about the limits of monetary policy right now. she said, “fiscal policy will need to be the main game in town.” and it’s been a busy week. i don’t know if you were able to pick up the pink paper and read that piece, but she does say 97 percent of advanced economies have rates below 1 percent. and i just wonder if you’d agree with her, in principle, that we are in a global liquidity trap, and what the consequences of that would be. we’ve talked a lot about fiscal policy here domestically, and she talks about the need for sort of a global cohesive approach to, to fiscal policy. my second question is, you talk about how you follow the epidemiology. you’re, you’re looking [inaudible]. and i wanted to ask you about how you look at [inaudible] christine lagarde laying out what the ecb plans to do. as you lent an ear to what she had to say, the dire warnings that she was making this morning as she looks at the situation that europe’s in, what can you and your colleagues learn about the second wave or the third wave that you’ve talked about and, and we’ve all feared when it comes to a, a policy response? chair powell. okay, thanks. so two questions. first, i, i take the sense of your first question to be, is monetary policy out of power or out of ammo? and the answer to that would be “no,” i don’t think that. i think—i think that we are strongly committed to using these powerful tools that we have to support the economy during this difficult time for as long as needed, and no one should have any doubt about that. and we do not doubt the power of the things that we’ve already done or the things that we may, may do in the future. i do think there’s more that can be done. and i also think, if you look at the stock of assets that we’ve bought, if you look at the facilities and, and the way we’ve been able to keep accommodative financial— financial conditions accommodative, i think we’ve been able to do a lot of things that are  providing very strong support for the economy. and we’re going to—we’re going to keep at that. i’ve said—we’ve said from the very beginning, though, that this is particular—that the particular situation we find ourselves in is one where there is a sudden loss of income on, on the part of millions and tens of millions of people. it’s not so much a typical recession where demand weakens, the fed cuts interest rates, interest rates stimulate demand, and the economy recovers. it’s a sudden shock where tens of millions of people are out of work. and the fiscal response was, was frankly, i think, very good and very robust in the united states. and it’s certainly one of the main reasons why the recovery has been as good as it’s been so far. so i do think fiscal policy is absolutely essential here. you know, stimulating aggregate demand is one thing, but where there’s a part of the economy that kind of will be resistant to that, you also need fiscal policy. and, of course, you need health-care policy too. i didn’t see madame lagarde’s comments this morning, but i, i took the sense of that question to be the spread of the disease in europe, and what do we think about that? yes. so, as i mentioned in my—in my opening remarks, it’s a concern. we have a widespread spike in cases across the country, more in some regions than others. and even if we don’t have—and i don’t expect that we would—sort of government-imposed restrictions, it does seem likely, though, that people who have maybe begun to engage in activities that they had in flying, staying in a hotel, going to restaurants, going to bars, and, and things like that, that they may pull back in a situation where suddenly the cases are everywhere in your city, your state, your community. so i do think that that’s a risk that we have as we go into the fall now and, and the cases spike. that, that could weigh on economic activity. one would expect that it would. we thought the same thing, in fairness, about the wave we had this summer in the south and the west. and the  economy, you know, seemed to move right through that. this one seems to be larger and more widespread. in any case, it’s a risk, is what i would characterize it—i would characterize it as a risk, as i did in my—in my comments. david gura. can i ask a quick follow-up, just about the passions of the fed chairman? we’ve listened to your rhetoric over the course of this pandemic, and you talked about what the fed was doing, the reasons for doing it at first. you talked about the balance between monetary and fiscal policy. i think in your recent comments and in governor brainard’s comments, certainly, there’s been more passion yet about the need for congress to do more—i know that you’re limited in what you can say or the degree to which you’d want to advise congress, but a simple question: do you feel that you’re being heard? as you look at the prospects for this economy and potential need for more fiscal policy, do you feel like those who are crafting that policy, or could be, are listening to you and have a firm grasp of what you’re saying about how that might affect or improve the economy going forward? chair powell. so let me—let me say, in the first instance, our, our main focus is on doing our job, and that is really what we’re, we’re focused on is using the tools that congress has given us and the assignment they’ve given us. and i think we’re, we’re—that is the thing that we think about night and day. i just know from, from the experience of the last cycle, it helps to have the whole government working on these things, and this one is particularly that way. and i, i don’t—i think—you know, i, i don’t want to say whether i feel like i’m being heard or not. but, sure, i think there are plenty of people on capitol hill who, on both sides of the aisle, on both sides of the hill, who see a need for further fiscal action and understand perfectly why that might be the case. david gura. thank you.  michelle smith. thank you. edward lawrence, fox business. edward lawrence. thank you, mr. chairman, for taking the question. so what would cause the federal reserve to shift more of its asset purchases towards the long-term securities and treasuries and change the amount of spending there also? and as a second point onto that, you know, would—if there’s no fiscal stimulus package, would that then trigger buying of more long-term assets or change the asset purchases? chair powell. so i don’t really have a specific hypothetical i would—i would put to you. i would just say that we, we understand that there are a number of parameters that we have where we can shift the composition, the duration, you know, the size, the life, life cycle of the program. all of those things are, are available to us as ways to deliver addition—you know, more accommodation if we think that’s appropriate. right now, we, we like the amount of accommodation the program is, is delivering. and it will just depend on the—on the facts and circumstances. we may reach a view at some point that we need to do more on that front. today’s meeting was about analyzing the—one of the things it was about was about analyzing the various ways and having a, you know, good discussion about how to think about those, those various parameters, which i, i thought was quite a useful discussion. michelle smith. thank you. victoria guida. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking the question. i wanted to ask about climate change. fhfa director mark calabria recently said that financial regulators need to account for financial change—climate change, i’m sorry. what are you all thinking of doing on that front beyond what you’re already doing, and do you have any plans for joining the network for greening the financial system?  chair powell. yes. so i, i do think that the public, public will expect and has every right to expect that we—that in our oversight of the financial system, we will account for all material risks and try to protect the economy and the public from those risks. climate change is, is one of those risks. it’s a relatively—the science and art of incorporating climate change into our thinking about financial regulation is relatively new, as you know. and we are, you know, very actively, in the early stages of this, getting up to speed, working with our central bank colleagues and other colleagues around the world to try to think about how this can be part of our framework. and we’re watching what other—what other countries are doing. we’re active participants, as you know, in the cg—no, the greening the financial system. and, you know, we haven’t, we hadn’t actually formally joined, but we’re there. we’re in the working groups, and we’re doing all of that. so we’re very much working with and monitoring the things other central banks are doing. you hear—you know, there’s lots of research going on at the various reserve banks and here at the board in trying to understand this. these tend to be longer-term risks. but, of course, the longer term does arrive over time. and, you know, we take it as our obligation to—you know, to understand these risks and incorporate them into our— into the way we supervise and, and think about the, the overall financial system and the economy. michelle smith. thank you. howard schneider, reuters. howard schneider. quick follow-up from gina’s question: have you gotten a commitment from secretary mnuchin to extend the 13(3) facilities if you decide it’s necessary, and are you concerned what a lame-duck trump administration might do in that regard? and then, more broadly, on the state of the economy, are you comfortable now that the tail risk for worst-case outcomes has been kind of swept aside and minimized at this point? are we down, in  other words, to kind of household-level problems among a large set of households, perhaps, but that the financial crisis, double-dip recession sort of scenarios are, are off the table? chair powell. so, on your first question, we, we really are just turning to this issue now, and we have not made any decisions. we, we are just getting started on it, and, and it’s a decision that we’ll make jointly with the treasury department. and that’s, that’s really all i can say today. that’s all i have for you on that today. in terms of the tail risks, i mean, i think clearly the tail risks that we were worried about have, have subsided. and, you know, we were worried about very negative potential outcomes. and that—you know, that’s, that’s—what is to be expected of us is, is to think about how things can go wrong as well as the way things that can go right. but we, we have to—we do make policy from a risk-management standpoint. we don’t just look at the most likely case. we, we ask, “how do you make policy in light of the risks?” and often it’s downside risks in a situation like this. i would not say that anybody’s feeling comfortable about this, though. you know, we’ve gotten through the first five, six months of the—of the expansion better than expected, but we do see in europe—look what’s happening in europe, look what’s happening here—another spike in cases as the cold weather arrives and people are inside more. so i think we have to be humble about where we are relative to this—to this disease. it hasn’t gone away. clearly, you know, therapeutics are advancing, research on vaccines are advancing, death rates are way down, hospitalization rates are, are lower now, but—so we’re learning. but, i mean, we, we are so— we’re very far from saying that we think we’ve got this and eliminated the tail risks. but i think, clearly, the tail risks have, have diminished since—at least our perception of them has diminished since earlier in the year. michelle smith. thank you. scott horsley, npr.  scott horsley. thank you, mr. chairman. earlier this summer, i know that you formed a task force to look at the distribution of coins around the system. i wonder if you can give us an update on how that’s going. i know there’s been some, some public relations effort. i think october was “get the coins moving” month. has that—has that problem subsided? chair powell. so let me say why it’s such an important—you know, in a world where so many payments are made digitally and all that, coins and currency are very important for the relatively low-income people. and so it’s a really incredibly important part of the payment system, and we do pay a lot of attention to it. and i actually just—i just caught up this morning with the—with the person who heads that operation here who, who says that, yes, things have really gotten significantly better on the coin front. so we worked very hard to increase the supply of coins and, even more than that, the distribution of coins around the system and are happy to say that that situation is well on the way to normalizing itself. so very pleased to report that. michelle smith. thank you. james politi, ft. james politi. thanks very much for the—for the question, chair powell. we’ve just had a presidential election here in the united states. we still don’t know who the winner is. are you concerned that perhaps tensions or uncertainty over the outcome of the presidential election could pose a risk to the economic outlook or trigger market turmoil? and has the fed had any discussions, either internally or with the treasury department, about responding to that, should it happen? chair powell. thanks. so i’m very reluctant, as you will imagine, to comment on the election directly, indirectly, at all, other than just to say that it’s a good time to take a step back and let the institutions of our democracy do their jobs. so, at the fed here, we will, as  always, continue to do our jobs. every day we’ll continue to serve the american people using our tools to support the economy during this difficult time. you know, the—you ask if we had discussions. i would say, you know, the meeting we just finished, for example, what we do is we talk about the economy and markets, domestically and around the world. we hear reports on how households and businesses are doing. we talk about risks to the outlook. we talk about what the right policy response might be. and the election comes up in some—you know, it comes up now and again, but it is not at all a central focus of the meeting. not at all. so i, i’ll just leave it at that. again, very reluctant to get into anything more than that. thanks. michelle smith. thank you. anneken, cnn. anneken tappe. thank you for taking my question. chairman powell, can you tell us a little bit more about why the minimum loan size under the main street facility was reduced last week and why that was done now rather than earlier, seeing that small businesses are still— clearly still—struggling to make the change necessary? chair powell. sure. so, we have had very little demand below $1 million in loans. and part of that just is that the fee structure is what it is, and that’s the compensation that the banks get. and there’s a certain amount of work that they have to do to get—to get into the loan program and do—and to document the thing, the loans that they make because these are loans that, you know, go on their balance sheet. they keep 5 percent, so they actually have to underwrite the credit. and we’re relying on them, to some extent, for, for doing that. and so we were reluctant. we moved the minimum down to $250,000, and we were reluctant to go below that. but we heard, over and over again, that it would be great if we could reduce it to $100,000. so—and, you know, we’ve been saying we’d have to redesign the program. and i, i got the question in a—in an oversight hearing a month or so ago with the secretary and said that.  and i went back to the office and thought, you know, okay, so what would that look like if we were to redesign the program in a way—what’s the least thing we could do to redesign the program so that we could move to a lower level? and it—basically, we concluded we could just change the fee structure to create incentives for that, so we did that. we try to be responsive. we want, you know, qualifying businesses to be able to borrow. and we’ll see how much demand will come. you know, with, with these programs, why did it—why didn’t we do it right away? we tend to—it’s—there’s more work than one might—certainly than i imagined in setting up one of these facilities. and you, you just try to get it out there and get it working and not try to do everything before you start it because you’ll never start it if you do that. then you get it started, and you make changes. and we’ve been willing to make changes. that’s the most recent set of ones that we’ve done. and, again, we hope—we hope that it will help some companies, and i guess we’ll find out. michelle smith. thank you. heather. heather scott. heather scott this time, right? thank you, chair powell, for taking the question. you say that you’re—that you’re not out of ammo. so i’m wondering, then, what is the next tool you expect to be able to roll out? would you consider some sort of credit program for state and local businesses—state and local governments that are facing real budgetary pressures? chair powell. so when i say we’re not out of ammo, i’m looking at, you know, a couple of our tools, mainly. as i mentioned, the asset purchase program—there’s a number of dimensions in which we can adjust that if we deem it to be appropriate. right now, we like the job it’s doing. we could, you know, if, if the facilities are extended, we could certainly look at  new facilities. if—you know, if things deteriorate, that would be the case where you’d want to maybe continue the facilities and, and, and maybe change them and maybe have new ones. who knows? but, certainly, the facilities have been doing a lot of work and been very successful, i think, overall in accomplishing that job. so i do think there, there are things that we can do. but, remember, we’ve always said this will take a whole of government approach, including health-care policy and fiscal policy too. so it really is, if you—if you want to get the economy back as quickly as possible to where we want it to be, then, then really it should be all of government working together. heather scott. if i could just follow up on that quickly. i mean, you spoke [inaudible] about the small business lending program. but that has only reached 400—there’s only been 400 loans. when you say the programs are effective, do you not think there’s more that can be done with another type of program or another redesign either for small businesses or for assisting state and local governments? chair powell. yes. there’s a bunch of programs. i would say that the, you know, the corporate—the larger corporate market-based lending program has been very successful without making a single loan—i think, unambiguously, has been a big success. i think the success—i think the state and local government program has also restored market function so that—whereas, you know, there were the, the sort of individual investors who wind up funding loans in the muni market through. through mutual funds, they, they had withdrawn a lot of money, and, and that—we’ve had many weeks of consecutive, i believe, of, of inflows there, and you’re largely back to a normal functioning market. i think that’s also been a success. i think the other—certainly the, the funding market programs have been a big success.  the—main street is just—is just a bigger challenge than all of them. reaching out to small and medium-sized businesses through the banking system, which we had to do, is, is quite challenging. i do think, you know, the grant programs, the ppp, were, were a great way to reach smaller companies. you know, what you hear out there is that demand—you talk to banks, and they’ll say demand for loans is very, very low right now. companies are not borrowing. and, and the reason is that, you know, activity’s at a relatively low level. they don’t want to run up their debt. you know, so i—we put, we put an awful lot into main street, and it is very challenging to reach a lot of those companies. but i—you know, i think we, we are reaching many of them now, and, and i hope that the new changes will help us reach more. michelle smith. thank you. last question to michael mckee, bloomberg. michael mckee. mr. chairman, there’s a small but growing number of people, including some former fed economists, who say you should find ways to go beyond your mandate to provide additional support to the economy, which, in essence, would be fiscal support, since it hasn’t come from congress. one of the suggestions is buying state and municipal securities directly. another is perhaps following the boe in increasing asset purchases to support additional fiscal programs or spending by the treasury. is there any circumstance under which you would consider those or those would be justified? how closely are you willing to work with treasury? chair powell. you know, so i’m going to take your question literally. and so if the idea is money-financed fiscal policy, that’s not something that we would consider. so that— what i mean by that is, is really, you know, the, the central bank is really funding fiscal activities of the government fairly directly. no, that’s not something we do. we have different jobs. that separation between those jobs is absolutely critical in our system of government. the—you  know, the job of taxation and spending goes to people who have stood for election and been elected, and that’s the way it should be. there—they have to be responsible to the electorate. we have a specific, you know, job to do with, with a specific set of tools to support maximum employment, stable prices, financial stability, help the payment system, supervise banks—all the things we’re assigned to do. but we, we, we’re not going to get into financing the government and, and—by the way, when we buy government bonds, we don’t—it doesn’t actually, as you probably know, doesn’t change the amount of government debt outstanding. we issue a reserve to, to purchase a treasury security, and that’s just another form—on the consolidated balance sheet of the federal government, that’s just another obligation. you change the—you change the, you know, the nature of the obligation, but not the total quantity of debt that the government has when you do these asset purchase programs. so i don’t know exactly what you’re referring to. but, you know, to—again, to take your question literally about financing fiscal activity, it’s really not something that we think the central bank should do and, and not something we’re looking at. michael mckee. if i could follow up, there is a suggestion that you buy state and municipal securities directly in the same way that you buy mortgage-backed securities, providing, then, cash to municipalities that are cash-strapped at this point. chair powell. well, we’re doing that with the municipal liquidity facility now, so we’re, we’re buying, you know, with, with our own funds and with the cares act funds that, that we’ve gotten through congress and the treasury. we’re buying municipal securities of up to three years. so we’re doing that now as part of an emergency facility under section 13(3), you know, which has to meet the emergency requirements of exigent circumstances and which is all clearly laid out in the law. so we’re, we’re actually doing that now.  but i, i see—what that is, from our standpoint, is a rare thing that we do under section 13(3) when regular intermediation in the capital markets or in the banking system has broken down. it’s no longer working. so we step in under 13(3), and we provide liquidity. what turns out to happen is, we announce a program, and the market starts working. so we only actually have to do a backstop. the amount of financing that’s happened in the municipal markets this year is much higher than it was the prior year, and, and we didn’t do it. we did—we’ve done a very small number of, of loans. but just the fact that we’re there as a backstop seems to—seems to get the private parties to get back together and, and get the market working again. so that’s what 13(3) is for. we’re not—that shouldn’t be a permanent thing where we’re just another federal financing agency that’s available to direct credit to—you know, to very worthy borrowers. that would be more along the lines of a gse. that’s not what we do. we’re there to provide emergency liquidity when intermediation has broken down and then to pull back on that when— you know, when—as the markets normalize, we pull back and we put those tools away, as we did after the global financial crisis and as we will here when the time comes. michelle smith. thank you very much. chair powell. thank you.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations the system open market account (soma) manager first discussed developments in financial markets. financial conditions were little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period and remained accommodative. market participants suggested that evolving expectations for u.s. fiscal policy as well as stronger-than-expected economic data and corporate earnings reports helped support equity prices. later in the intermeeting period, however, rising covid-19 cases in europe and the united states weighed on the outlook, and equity prices reversed some of their earlier gains. implied volatility in the equity market moved higher during the intermeeting period, reflecting uncertainties associated with the u.s. election and the future path of fiscal policy as well as concerns about the trajectory of covid-19 cases. alyssa g. anderson,2 benjamin k. johannsen,2 and matthew malloy,2 section chiefs, division of monetary affairs, board of governors; penelope a. beattie,2 section chief, office of the secretary, board of governors david h. small, project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors michele cavallo, dobrislav dobrev, anna orlik, and judit temesvary,2 principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board of governors arsenios skaperdas,2 senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board of governors randall a. williams, lead information manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors gregory l. stefani, first vice president, federal reserve bank of cleveland kartik b. athreya, joseph w. gruber, glenn d. rudebusch, daleep singh, and christopher j. waller, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of richmond, kansas city, san francisco, new york, and st. louis, respectively spencer krane, antoine martin,2 paolo a. pesenti, and nathaniel wuerffel,2 senior vice presidents, federal reserve banks of chicago, new york, new york, and new york, respectively satyajit chatterjee, mark j. jensen, dina marchioni,2 matthew d. raskin,2 and patricia zobel, vice presidents, federal reserve banks of philadelphia, atlanta, new york, new york, and new york, respectively daniel cooper, senior economist and policy advisor, federal reserve bank of boston ryan bush,2 markets manager, federal reserve bank of new york market participants’ expectations for the path of the federal funds rate were little changed over the intermeeting period. in the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants, respondents’ views on when the committee will most likely start raising the target range for the federal funds rate were centered around 2024. expectations for the economic conditions that will prevail when the fomc first lifts the target range were little changed since the september surveys. respondents to the desk’s surveys generally expected the federal reserve’s purchases of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) to continue at the current pace through the end of 2021 and then to slow in subsequent years, although there was a wide range of views about purchase amounts for 2022 and 2023. market participants appeared increasingly focused on how the committee’s communications on asset purchases might evolve. they expected those communications to place a greater emphasis on fostering accommodative financial conditions, and many noted the possibility that at some point the committee might convey additional guidance about the future path of asset purchases. some market participants expected the committee to eventually lengthen the weighted average maturity of the federal reserve’s purchases of treasury securities.  minutes of the meeting of november 4–5, 2020 page 3 the manager turned next to a discussion of financial market functioning, open market operations, and conditions in short-term funding markets. markets for treasury securities and agency mbs continued to function smoothly, with bid-ask spreads and a range of other market functioning indicators remaining near pre-pandemic levels. weekly operations continued for agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs), with the desk purchasing only modest amounts. short-term dollar funding markets also continued to function smoothly over the period, and forward measures of funding rates were consistent with expectations for calm conditions over year-end. the federal reserve’s balance sheet increased modestly over the intermeeting period to $7.2 trillion, as growth in securities holdings was partially offset by a decline in u.s. dollar liquidity swaps outstanding. outstanding balances for credit and liquidity facilities were little changed. the manager noted that market participants continued to view these facilities as important backstops that would support market functioning and the flow of credit should stresses reemerge. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. discussion on asset purchases participants discussed the fomc’s asset purchases, including the role they are playing in supporting the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. in their discussions, participants focused on the objectives of these purchases; considerations for assessing the appropriate pace and composition of asset purchases over time; communications regarding the future path of asset purchases; and the potential effects of higher levels of reserves, associated with the ongoing expansion in federal reserve asset holdings, on banks’ balance sheets and money market rates. participants agreed that this discussion would be helpful for future assessments of the appropriate structure of the committee’s asset purchases. while participants judged that immediate adjustments to the pace and composition of asset purchases were not necessary, they recognized that circumstances could shift to warrant such adjustments. accordingly, participants saw the ongoing careful consideration of potential next steps for enhancing the committee’s guidance for its asset purchases as appropriate. the participants’ discussion was preceded by staff presentations. the staff reviewed some key considerations relevant for conducting asset purchases in the current environment. the staff judged that the committee’s forward guidance on the federal funds rate, the expansion of the federal reserve’s securities holdings since march, and expectations for a further expansion all had contributed to a very low level of longer-term yields despite substantial treasury debt issuance. the staff noted that financial market participants generally expected the committee to continue its net asset purchases at the current pace through next year and at a reduced pace in subsequent years. the staff discussed various changes the committee could make to the structure of its purchases, including to their pace and composition as well as to the guidance the committee has been providing to the public about its future asset purchases. the staff discussed the structure of asset purchase programs of several foreign central banks and how they have evolved during the pandemic. finally, the staff evaluated how higher levels of reserves associated with the ongoing expansion in the federal reserve’s asset holdings might influence banks’ balance sheets and money market rates and discussed the various tools that the federal reserve has for managing money market rates in an environment with very high levels of reserves. in their discussion regarding the role of the committee’s asset purchases, participants noted that these purchases have supported and sustained smooth market functioning and helped foster accommodative financial conditions. with market functioning seen as having largely recovered, many participants indicated that the role of asset purchases had shifted more toward fostering accommodative financial conditions for households and businesses to support the committee’s employment and inflation goals. still, participants generally judged that asset purchases would continue to support smooth market functioning, and many judged that asset purchases helped provide insurance against risks that might reemerge in financial markets in an environment of high uncertainty. a few participants indicated that asset purchases could also help guard against undesirable upward pressure on longer-term rates that could arise, for example, from higher-than-expected treasury debt issuance. several participants noted the possibility that there may be limits to the amount of additional accommodation that could be provided through increases in the federal reserve’s asset holdings in light of the low level of longer-term yields, and they expressed concerns that a significant expansion in asset holdings could have unintended consequences.  page 4 federal open market committee participants commented on considerations related to the appropriate pace and composition of asset purchases. participants generally saw the current pace and composition as effective in fostering accommodative financial conditions. participants noted that the committee could provide more accommodation, if appropriate, by increasing the pace of purchases or by shifting its treasury purchases to those with a longer maturity without increasing the size of its purchases. alternatively, the committee could provide more accommodation, if appropriate, by conducting purchases of the same pace and composition over a longer horizon. pointing to the recently announced change in the bank of canada’s asset purchase program, several participants judged that the committee could maintain its current degree of accommodation by lengthening the maturity of the committee’s treasury purchases while reducing the pace of purchases somewhat. in their view, such a change in the committee’s purchase structure would have to be carefully communicated to the public to avoid the misperception that the reduced pace of purchases represented a decline in the degree of accommodation. a few participants expressed concern that maintaining the current pace of agency mbs purchases could contribute to potential valuation pressures in housing markets. the september fomc statement indicated that asset purchases will continue “over coming months,” and participants viewed this guidance for asset purchases as having served the committee well so far. most participants judged that the committee should update this guidance at some point and implement qualitative outcome-based guidance that links the horizon over which the committee anticipates it would be conducting asset purchases to economic conditions. these participants indicated that updating the committee’s guidance for asset purchases in this manner would help keep the market’s expectation for future asset purchases aligned with the committee’s intentions. some of these participants also saw such updated guidance as reinforcing the committee’s commitment to fostering outcomes consistent with maximum employment and inflation that averages 2 percent over time. a few participants were hesitant to make changes in the near term to the guidance for asset purchases and pointed to considerable uncertainty about the economic outlook and the appropriate use of balance sheet policies given that uncertainty. participants noted that it would be important for the committee’s guidance for future asset purchases to be consistent with the committee’s forward guidance for the federal funds rate so that the use of these tools would be well coordinated in terms of achieving the committee’s objectives. most participants judged that the guidance for asset purchases should imply that increases in the committee’s securities holdings would taper and cease sometime before the committee would begin to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. a number of participants highlighted the view that after net purchases cease there would likely be a period of time in which maturing assets would be reinvested to roughly maintain the size of the federal reserve’s securities holdings. participants commented on how a higher level of reserves associated with the expansion in the federal reserve’s asset holdings might affect the banking sector and money markets. a few participants raised concerns about the possibility that much higher levels of reserves might create pressure on banks’ balance sheets, including on regulatory ratios, or could potentially put undue downward pressure on money market rates. most participants judged that the federal reserve had effective tools to address these circumstances. some participants noted that, if needed, the federal reserve could consider various steps to manage the levels of short-term interest rates and the quantity of reserves, such as adjusting administered rates, expanding the overnight reverse repurchase agreement program, or implementing a maturity extension program. staff review of the economic situation the coronavirus pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activity in the united states and abroad. the information available at the time of the november 4–5 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) had rebounded at a rapid rate in the third quarter but remained well below its level at the start of the year. labor market conditions improved further in september, although the pace of gains eased and employment continued to be well below its level at the beginning of the year. consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce) through september—had returned to its yearearlier pace but remained noticeably below the rates that were posted in january and february. total nonfarm payroll employment expanded strongly in september, but the gain was markedly below the even larger increases seen in previous months. through september, payroll employment had retraced only about half of the decline seen at the onset of the pandemic.  minutes of the meeting of november 4–5, 2020 page 5 the unemployment rate moved down further to 7.9 percent in september. the unemployment rates for african americans and asians both decreased, but the unemployment rate for hispanics was little changed, and each group’s rate remained well above the national average. in addition, the overall labor force participation rate declined, and the employment-to-population ratio rose only slightly. initial claims for unemployment insurance continued to move lower, on net, through late october, and weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by the board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp suggested that employment gains from mid-september to mid-october remained solid. the employment cost index (eci) for total hourly labor compensation in the private sector, which likely had been less influenced than other hourly compensation measures by the concentration of recent job losses among lower-wage workers, rose 2.4 percent over the 12 months ending in september. this gain was a little smaller than the index’s year-earlier 12-month change; in addition, the 3-month changes in the eci in june and september were noticeably below the average pace seen over the period from 2017 through 2019. total pce price inflation was 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in september and continued to be held down by relatively weak aggregate demand and the declines in consumer energy prices seen earlier in the year. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 1.5 percent over the same period, while the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 1.9 percent in september. on a monthly basis, inflation was a little lower in september, largely reflecting slower goods price inflation. the latest readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations moved lower, though each remained within the range in which it has fluctuated in recent years; in october, the university of michigan surveys of consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years fell back to the level that prevailed in early 2020, while in september the 3-year-ahead measure from the federal reserve bank of new york retraced its august increase. real pce rose strongly in the third quarter, though the increase was not sufficient to return consumer spending to its pre-pandemic level. real disposable personal income declined, reflecting a large reduction in government transfer payments. as a result, the personal saving rate moved sharply lower, though it was still elevated relative to its 2019 average. the consumer sentiment measures from the michigan survey and the conference board had moved higher, on net, since august; although both indexes stood above their april troughs, they remained well below their levels at the start of the year. housing-sector activity advanced in the third quarter, with real residential investment and home sales both moving above their first-quarter levels. activity in this sector was likely being supported by low interest rates, the sector’s ability to adjust business practices in response to social distancing, and pent-up demand following the widespread shutdowns earlier in the year. business fixed investment expanded strongly, led by an outsized increase in third-quarter equipment spending. by contrast, spending on nonresidential structures continued to move lower and was likely restrained by firms’ hesitation to commit to projects with lengthy times to completion and uncertain future returns as well as by the effect of lower oil prices on drilling investment. growth in both total industrial production and manufacturing output turned negative in september after having slowed markedly in august. part of the softness in manufacturing production appeared to be attributable to pandemic-related delays in the motor vehicle industry’s model-year changeover, though subdued foreign demand and weaker demand from domestic energy producers were also likely acting to restrain factory output. as of september, manufacturing output had recovered roughly two-thirds of the drop seen earlier in the year. total real government purchases declined in the third quarter. federal nondefense purchases fell especially sharply, largely reflecting a step-down in lender processing fees associated with the paycheck protection program (ppp). in addition, real purchases by state and local governments declined further. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit narrowed in september after widening in august. both exports and imports continued to rebound from their collapse in the first half of the year. goods imports fully recovered to their january level, with broad-based increases in august and september. in contrast, goods exports by september recovered only two-thirds of their decline since january despite brisk growth in exports of agricultural products and industrial supplies. services trade remained depressed, driven by the continued suspension of most international travel. altogether, net exports made a substantial negative contribution to real gdp growth in the third quarter. economic activity abroad rebounded sharply in the third quarter following a rollback of pandemic-related restrictions. gdp levels, however, generally remained well  page 6 federal open market committee below their pre-pandemic peaks, with china being a notable exception. domestic demand supported the recovery, and in asia there was also a strong rebound of exports, especially of electronics and, more recently, autos. third-quarter growth was particularly rapid in those economies that experienced some of the deepest contractions in the second quarter, including france, italy, and spain among the advanced foreign economies (afes) and mexico among the emerging market economies. after falling through the end of the summer in many countries, inflation rates started to rise over the past two months but remained well below rates from early in the year. the rapid increase over recent weeks of new covid-19 cases in several afes, especially in europe, prompted governments to reintroduce restrictions to rein in this renewed wave of infections. in late october, the governments of several european countries—including england, france, and germany—announced new nationwide restrictions (including the closures of bars and restaurants) and, in some cases, restrictions to the mobility of individuals within and across regions. still, relative to the spring, restrictions were noticeably less severe; factories, most businesses, and schools generally remained open. staff review of the financial situation financial market sentiment was little changed over the intermeeting period against the backdrop of evolving u.s. election and fiscal outlooks, as well as rising covid-19 cases in the united states and europe. on net, the treasury yield curve steepened modestly, corporate bond spreads narrowed somewhat, and broad equity price indexes increased. inflation compensation increased a little further, remaining close to pre-pandemic levels. financing conditions for businesses with access to capital markets and households with high credit scores remained generally accommodative, although conditions remained tight or tightened somewhat for other borrowers. yields on two-year nominal treasury securities were little changed over the intermeeting period, while longerterm yields increased modestly, on net, reportedly reflecting market participants’ reassessments of the election outcome and the outlook for fiscal policy. fomc communications and macroeconomic data releases did not elicit material yield reactions. measures of inflation compensation based on treasury inflation-protected securities (tips) edged up, on net, remaining close to their pre-pandemic levels. this development reflected in part the recovery of tips market liquidity conditions from their stressed levels in the spring. however, both the 5-year and 5-to-10-year measures of inflation compensation remained near the lower ends of their historical ranges. the expected path for the federal funds rate over the next few years, as implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes, was little changed, on net, since the september fomc meeting and remained close to the effective lower bound (elb) until the end of 2023. survey-based expectations favored the first increase in the federal funds rate to occur in 2024. broad stock price indexes increased, on balance, over the intermeeting period amid volatility associated with market participants’ reactions to news on the u.s. election, the pandemic’s trajectory, and the fiscal policy outlook. one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—increased some, on net, after briefly rising sharply late in the intermeeting period. spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity treasury yields narrowed across the credit spectrum and stood somewhat below their historical median levels at the end of the intermeeting period. conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period. spreads on commercial paper (cp) and negotiable certificates of deposit across different tenors were little changed and remained at pre-pandemic levels. the outstanding level of nonfinancial cp continued to move down over the intermeeting period, reportedly driven by issuers’ relatively low appetite for cp funding in light of the availability of longer-term financing on attractive terms. september quarter-end effects were muted, and there was no credit outstanding through the commercial paper funding facility by the end of the intermeeting period. conditions in money market funds (mmfs) were also generally calm over the intermeeting period, and net yields of mmfs remained stable near historical lows. the effective federal funds rate stood at 9 basis points, unchanged from the average over the previous intermeeting period. the secured overnight financing rate averaged 8 basis points, edging down from the previous intermeeting period amid a modest net decrease in treasury bill issuance. the amount of federal reserve repurchase agreements outstanding remained at zero over the intermeeting period, as dealers were able to obtain more attractive rates in the private market. the federal reserve increased holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs at the same pace as over the previous intermeeting period.  minutes of the meeting of november 4–5, 2020 page 7 investor sentiment abroad turned negative over the intermeeting period amid rising covid-19 case counts, newly adopted restrictions aimed at containing the spread of the virus, and indicators pointing to a slowing recovery in several foreign economies, particularly in the euro area. uncertainty about additional u.s. fiscal stimulus and the outcome of the u.s. presidential election also caused some asset price volatility abroad. on net, most foreign equity indexes declined, option-implied volatility in the euro area increased a bit, and most afe long-term sovereign yields fell. overall, the broad dollar index was little changed over the intermeeting period. the dollar appreciated modestly against most afe currencies except the japanese yen and the british pound. several asian currencies, including the chinese renminbi, the south korean won, and the taiwanese dollar, appreciated against the u.s. dollar amid improving growth prospects and low covid-19 case counts. most latin american currencies (especially the brazilian real) and the turkish lira depreciated against the u.s. dollar on concerns about fiscal and political prospects in latin america and turkey. financing conditions in capital markets continued to be broadly accommodative over the intermeeting period, supported by low interest rates and high equity valuations. with historically low corporate bond yields, gross issuance of both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds remained solid in september, moderating from robust readings in august but staying close to the averages seen in recent years. most of this issuance was reportedly intended to refinance existing debt. gross institutional leveraged loan issuance continued to pick up in september but remained below its average pace in 2019. collateralized loan obligation issuance was strong in september, likely supporting robust investor demand for newly issued leveraged loans in the coming months. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations continued to show signs of stabilization. the volume of downgrades to corporate bonds and leveraged loans fell to pre-pandemic levels through september. corporate bond and leveraged loan defaults were low in august and september relative to their elevated readings in july. market indicators of expected corporate bond and leveraged loan defaults remained somewhat elevated at above pre-pandemic levels, especially for lower-rated leveraged loan issuers. commercial and industrial (c&i) loans on banks’ balance sheets continued to decline through september, reflecting a mix of weak origination activity and the repayment of credit-line draws from earlier in the year. in the october senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported that standards for c&i loans continued to tighten during the third quarter, although fewer banks reported tightening than in previous quarters. in addition, demand for c&i loans reportedly weakened in the third quarter. financing conditions for small businesses remained tight as a result of the pandemic. small business loan originations dropped off sharply in august after a temporary boost from ppp distributions over the summer. at the same time, small businesses’ liquidity needs were high and appeared likely to increase further, with the most recent census bureau small business pulse survey pointing to a majority of small businesses having no more than two months of cash on hand and many small businesses anticipating some need for additional financial assistance in the next six months. however, the uncertainty surrounding earning prospects was reportedly making many business owners less willing to take on debt at prevailing terms. small business loan performance generally deteriorated further over the intermeeting period. for commercial real estate (cre) financed through capital markets, financing conditions remained accommodative over the intermeeting period. spreads on agency cmbs were narrow, and issuance was very strong in september. spreads on triple-a non-agency cmbs, which were already within their pre-pandemic range in august, moved down further in september and early october, while non-agency issuance remained relatively subdued in september. in contrast, cre loan growth at banks decelerated in the third quarter, while standards for cre loans tightened further, according to the october sloos. financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were little changed over the intermeeting period. mortgage rates remained near historical lows, supporting high volumes of both home-purchase and refinancing originations. credit continued to flow to higher-score borrowers meeting standard conforming loan criteria, while it remained tight for borrowers with lower credit scores and for nonstandard mortgage products. residential real estate loans on banks’ balance sheets declined, and the october sloos suggested that lending standards tightened for all mortgage types. mortgage forbearance rates continued their downward trend, and the rate of new delinquencies remained low. in consumer credit markets, conditions remained accommodative for borrowers with relatively strong credit  page 8 federal open market committee scores but continued to be tight for borrowers with subprime credit scores. banks in the october sloos indicated that standards tightened and demand was little changed, on balance, across consumer loan types following a sharp contraction in demand in the second quarter. credit card balances continued to decline through the third quarter, with gains in balances for account holders with prime credit scores offset by declines in those for nonprime accounts. interest rates on existing accounts were little changed and remained below pre-crisis levels, while interest rates on new accounts to nonprime borrowers remained elevated. auto loan balances increased solidly for prime and near-prime borrowers but declined for subprime borrowers. auto loan interest rates increased but stayed below pre-pandemic levels. conditions in the asset-backed securities market remained stable over the intermeeting period. the staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system. the staff judged that, accounting for low interest rates, asset valuations appeared moderate, with measures of compensation for risk generally in the middle of their historical ranges. however, uncertainty regarding the pandemic and economic outlook has been high, and the risk of sizable declines in asset prices, should adverse shocks materialize, has remained significant. cre prices had started to decline in some sectors, while market conditions, including rising vacancies and declining rents, pointed to a risk of further drops, especially in severely affected sectors. the staff assessed vulnerabilities associated with household and business borrowing as notable. household finances had weakened with the economic downturn, and some households could find debt levels burdensome going forward. business debt levels were high before the pandemic, and the ability of some businesses to service these obligations will depend on the course of the economic recovery. the staff assessed vulnerabilities arising from financial leverage as moderate. while the banking sector has been resilient to recent developments, banks’ profitability, as well as that of a range of financial institutions, could be affected by future losses, the weakening of the economic outlook relative to pre-pandemic conditions, and low interest rates. with regard to funding risks, the staff highlighted that structural vulnerabilities in markets for short-term funding and corporate bonds remained present. emergency facilities were viewed as critical in restoring market functioning and continued to serve as important backstops. the staff also summarized near-term risks to financial stability identified in outreach to the public in recent months, including concerns associated with the outlook for the pandemic and business defaults. staff economic outlook in the u.s. economic projection prepared by the staff for the november fomc meeting, the rate of real gdp growth and the pace of declines in the unemployment rate over the second half of this year were similar to those in the september forecast despite material revisions to several assumptions influencing the outlook along with incoming data that were, on balance, better than expected. in particular, in the absence of clear progress toward an agreement on further fiscal stimulus, the staff removed the assumption that an additional tranche of fiscal policy support would be enacted. although this lack of additional fiscal support was expected to cause significant hardships for a number of households, the staff now assessed that the savings cushion accumulated by other households would be enough to allow total consumption to be largely maintained through year-end. hence, as in the september projection, the staff continued to expect a rapid but partial rebound in activity over the second half of the year following the unprecedented contraction in the spring. the inflation forecast for the rest of the year was revised up slightly in response to incoming readings on inflation that were, on balance, higher than expected. nevertheless, inflation was still projected to finish the year at a relatively subdued level, reflecting substantial margins of slack in labor and product markets and the large declines in consumer energy prices seen earlier in the year. in the staff’s medium-term projection, the assumption that significant additional fiscal support would not be enacted pointed to a lower trajectory for aggregate demand going forward. however, recent data on tax receipts also suggested that the fiscal positions of states and localities had deteriorated less than expected, which led the staff to boost the projected path of state and local government purchases. hence, with monetary policy assumed to remain highly accommodative and social-distancing measures expected to ease further, the staff continued to project that real gdp over the medium term would outpace potential, leading to a considerable further decline in the unemployment rate. the resulting take-up of economic slack was in turn expected to cause inflation to increase gradually, and the inflation rate was projected to moderately overshoot 2 percent for some time in the years beyond 2023 as monetary policy remained accommodative.  minutes of the meeting of november 4–5, 2020 page 9 the staff continued to observe that the uncertainty related to the future course of the pandemic and its consequences for the economy was high. the staff also continued to view the risks to the economic outlook as tilted to the downside, with the latest data suggesting an increased probability of a resurgence in the disease. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook participants noted that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. economic activity and employment had continued to recover but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year. weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices had been holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economy’s medium-term outlook. participants observed that the economy had registered a rapid though incomplete rebound, with third-quarter real gdp rising at an annual rate of 33 percent, reflecting gains across consumer spending, housing-sector activity, and business equipment investment. in recent months, however, the pace of improvement had moderated, with slower growth expected for the fourth quarter. participants noted that economic activity thus far had recovered faster than had been expected earlier in the year. household spending on goods, especially durable goods, had been strong and had moved above its pre-pandemic level. participants commented that the rebound in consumer spending was due in part to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided essential support to many households. participants viewed accommodative monetary policy as also contributing to gains in durable goods and residential investment as well as the surge in home sales. in contrast, participants noted that consumer outlays for services were increasing more slowly than for durable goods, particularly for items such as air travel, hotel accommodations, and restaurant meals, which had been significantly disrupted by voluntary and mandated social-distancing measures. participants generally expected the strength in household spending to continue, especially for durable goods and residential investment. a few participants noted that households’ balance sheets generally appeared healthy and an unwinding of the large pool of household savings accumulated during the pandemic could provide greater-than-anticipated momentum to consumer spending over coming months. however, several participants expressed concern that, in the absence of additional fiscal support, lower- and moderateincome households might need to reduce their spending sharply when their savings were exhausted. a couple of these participants noted reports from their banking contacts that households appeared to be rapidly exhausting funds they received from fiscal relief programs. participants noted that business equipment investment had also picked up. a few participants expected the momentum in investment to extend into next year as the economic recovery continued, while a couple of other participants noted that many businesses in their districts were deferring longer-term commitments because of heighted uncertainty about the economic outlook. the recovery was viewed as unevenly distributed across industries. while many business contacts, particularly those in the durable goods or housing industries, reported progress in adapting to the pandemic or improved business conditions, others—especially those with ties to small businesses and the hospitality, aviation, and nonresidential construction industries—were still seeing very difficult circumstances. contacts reported improved conditions in the agricultural sector, boosted by strong demand from china as well as domestic ethanol production, higher crop prices, and federal aid payments. looking ahead, some business contacts expressed concerns that many households and businesses were currently in a weaker position to weather additional economic shocks than they had been at the beginning of the pandemic. participants observed that labor market conditions had continued to improve in recent months, with roughly half of the 22 million jobs lost over march and april having been regained. the unemployment rate had declined further, and the employment gains since the spring were generally seen as larger than anticipated. business contacts in a couple of districts—particularly those in the manufacturing, health-care, and technology sectors—reported having trouble hiring workers for reasons likely related to virus cases or workers’ need to provide childcare. several participants noted that the decline in the unemployment rate in recent months had been accompanied by a fall in the labor force participation rate, particularly among those with a high school education or lower and among women. although the number of workers on temporary layoff had fallen  page 10 federal open market committee sharply, the number of permanent job losers had continued to rise. most participants commented that the pace of labor market improvement was likely to moderate going forward. a couple of them noted that many businesses in industries severely affected by the pandemic were downsizing or that some businesses were focused on cutting costs or increasing productivity, including through automation. many participants observed that high rates of job losses had been especially prevalent among lower-wage workers, particularly in the services sector, and among women, african americans, and hispanics. a few participants noted that these trends, if slow to reverse, could exacerbate racial, gender, and other social-economic disparities. in addition, a slow job market recovery would cause particular hardship for those with less educational attainment, less access to childcare or broadband, or greater need for retraining. in their comments about inflation, participants noted that some consumer prices had increased more quickly than expected in recent months but that broader price trends were still quite soft. the upturn in consumer price inflation was primarily attributed to price increases in sectors where the pandemic had induced stronger demand, such as consumer durables. in contrast, services price inflation remained softer than pre-pandemic rates, as prices for the categories most affected by social distancing, such as accommodations and airfares, continued to be very depressed and housing services inflation moderated. several participants commented on the unusually large relative price movements caused by the pandemic and the considerable uncertainty as to how long these price changes would persist. participants noted that financial conditions were generally accommodative and that actions by the federal reserve, including the establishment of emergency lending facilities with the approval of and, in some cases, provision of equity investments by the treasury, were supporting the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities. while these actions were viewed as contributing to accommodative financial conditions, participants noted important differences in credit availability across borrowers. in particular, financing conditions eased further for residential mortgage borrowers and for large corporations that were able to access capital markets, but surveys of credit availability indicated that bank lending conditions tightened further. a few participants noted that the financing conditions for small businesses were especially worrisome, as the ppp had ended and the prospect for additional fiscal support remained uncertain. they pointed to the most recent census bureau small business pulse survey, in which more than half of the respondents reported having no more than two months of cash on hand. participants continued to see the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook as quite elevated, with the path of the economy highly dependent on the course of the virus; on how individuals, businesses, and public officials responded to it; and on the effectiveness of public health measures to address it. participants cited several downside risks that could threaten the recovery. while another broad economic shutdown was seen as unlikely, participants remained concerned about the possibility of a further resurgence of the virus that could undermine the recovery. the majority of participants also saw the risk that current and expected fiscal support for households, businesses, and state and local governments might not be sufficient to sustain activity levels in those sectors, while a few participants noted that additional fiscal stimulus that was larger than anticipated could be an upside risk. some participants commented that the recent surge in virus cases in europe and the reimposition of restrictions there could lead to a slowdown in economic activity in the euro area and have negative spillover effects on the u.s. recovery. some participants raised concerns regarding the longer-run effects of the pandemic, including sectoral restructurings that could slow employment growth or an acceleration of technological disruptions that could be limiting the pricing power of some firms. a number of participants commented on various potential risks to financial stability. a few participants noted that the banking system showed considerable resilience through the end of the third quarter, and a few observed that this resilience partly reflected stronger-than-expected balance sheets of their customers, with delinquency rates declining or showing only moderate increases. moreover, capital positions and loan loss reserves for large banks were higher than before the pandemic. several participants emphasized the need to ensure that banks continue to maintain strong capital levels, as lower levels of capital are typically associated with tighter credit availability from banks. several participants commented on the vulnerabilities witnessed during the march selloff in the treasury market. the substantial maturity and liquidity transformations undertaken by some nonbank financial institutions—such as prime mmfs and corporate bond and bank loan mutual funds—were also discussed. a couple of participants expressed concerns that a prolonged period of low interest rates and highly accommodative financial market conditions could lead to excessive risk-taking, which in  minutes of the meeting of november 4–5, 2020 page 11 turn could result in elevated firm bankruptcies and significant employment losses in the next economic downturn. a few participants noted that climate change poses important challenges to financial stability and welcomed analysis of climate change as both a source of shocks and an underlying vulnerability. a couple of participants commented that the actions taken by the federal reserve to support the economy and achieve its mandated goals also supported financial stability. relatedly, several participants emphasized the important roles various section 13(3) facilities played in restoring financial market confidence and supporting financial stability; they noted that these facilities were still serving as an important backstop in financial markets. a few participants noted that it was important to extend them beyond year-end. in their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed the federal reserve’s commitment to using its full range of tools in order to support the u.s. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. in light of this assessment, all participants judged that maintaining an accommodative stance of monetary policy was essential to foster economic recovery and to achieve the committee’s long-run 2 percent inflation objective. participants remarked that the committee’s action in september to provide more explicit outcome-based forward guidance for the federal funds rate had been an important step to affirm the committee’s strong commitment to the goals and strategy articulated in its revised statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. several participants noted that they were encouraged by evidence that suggested that market participants’ expectations of the economic conditions that would likely prevail at the time of liftoff seemed broadly consistent with the committee’s forward guidance and revised consensus statement. participants agreed that monetary policy was providing substantial accommodation, and most concurred that, with the federal funds rate at the elb, much of that accommodation was due to the committee’s forward guidance and increases in securities holdings. they judged that the current stance of monetary policy remained appropriate, as both employment and inflation remained well short of the committee’s goals and the uncertainty about the course of the virus and the outlook for the economy continued to be very elevated. participants viewed the resurgence of covid-19 cases in the united states and abroad as a downside risk to the recovery; a few participants noted that diminished odds for further significant fiscal support also increased downside risks and added to uncertainty about the economic outlook. regarding asset purchases, participants judged that it would be appropriate over coming months for the federal reserve to increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs at least at the current pace. these actions would continue to help sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. many participants judged that the committee might want to enhance its guidance for asset purchases fairly soon. most participants favored moving to qualitative outcome-based guidance for asset purchases that links the horizon over which the committee anticipates it would be conducting asset purchases to economic conditions. a few participants were hesitant to make changes in the near term to the guidance for asset purchases and pointed to considerable uncertainty about the economic outlook and the appropriate use of balance sheet policies given that uncertainty. discussion on recommended changes to the summary of economic projections participants considered two recommendations from the subcommittee on communications for changes to the summary of economic projections (sep) that would enhance the information provided to the public. these recommendations included accelerating the release of the full set of sep exhibits from three weeks after the corresponding fomc meeting, when the minutes of that meeting are released, to the day of the policy decision and adding new charts that display a time series of diffusion indexes for participants’ judgments of uncertainty and risks. with these recommendations, the written summary of the projections that has been included as an addendum to the minutes of the corresponding fomc meeting would be discontinued. most of the participants who commented noted that releasing all sep materials at the time of the postmeeting statement would provide greater context for the policy decision, highlight the risk-management factors relevant for the decision, or further emphasize the degree of uncertainty around participants’ modal projections. some who commented noted that the sep serves a valuable role in illustrating how participants’ policy assessments  page 12 federal open market committee respond to changes in the economic outlook. most participants who commented suggested that it would be useful to continue thinking about options for refining the sep. participants unanimously supported the recommended changes and agreed that they should be implemented beginning in december. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. they noted that economic activity and employment had continued to recover but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year, and that weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices had been holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. members also stated that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus. in addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and was posing considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. all members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation running persistently below this longerrun goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. members expected to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until those outcomes were achieved. all members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, members agreed that over coming months it would be appropriate for the federal reserve to increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market func- tioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective november 6, 2020, the federal open market committee directs the desk to:      undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) at the current pace. increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s  minutes of the meeting of november 4–5, 2020 page 13   holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs. allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. the covid-19 pandemic is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. economic activity and employment have continued to recover but remain well below their levels at the beginning of the year. weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices have been holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy will depend significantly on the course of the virus. the ongoing public health crisis will continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. the committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, over coming months the federal reserve will increase its holdings of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace to sustain smooth market functioning and help foster accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, mary c. daly, patrick harker, robert s. kaplan, loretta j. mester, and randal k. quarles. voting against this action: none. ms. daly voted as alternate member at this meeting. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective november 6, 2020. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, december 15– 16, 2020. the meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on november 5, 2020. notation votes by notation vote completed on september 30, 2020, the committee unanimously approved the selection of trevor reeve to serve as economist and rochelle edge to serve as associate economist, effective october 1, 2020.  page 14 federal open market committee by notation vote completed on october 6, 2020, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on september 15–16, 2020.  james a. clouse secretary 
ce december 16, 2020 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us—maximum employment and price stability. since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. today my colleagues on the fomc and i reaffirmed our strong forward guidance for interest rates and also provided additional guidance for our asset purchases. together, these measures will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. economic activity has continued to recover from its depressed second-quarter level. the substantial reopening of the economy led to a rapid rebound in activity, and real gdp rose at an annual rate of 33 percent in the third quarter. in recent months, however, the pace of improvement has moderated. household spending on goods, especially durable goods, has been strong and has moved above its pre-pandemic level. in contrast, spending on services remains low, especially in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. the overall rebound in household spending owes in part to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which provided essential support to many families and individuals. the housing sector has fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. business investment has also picked up. the recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, and forecasts from fomc participants for economic growth this year have been revised up since our september summary of economic projections. even so, overall economic activity remains well below its level before the pandemic, and the path ahead remains highly uncertain.  in the labor market, more than half of the 22 million jobs that were lost in march and april have been regained, as many people were able to return to work. as with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market has moderated. job growth slowed to 245,000 in november, and while the unemployment rate has continued to decline, it remains elevated at 6.7 percent. participation in the labor market remains notably below pre-pandemic levels. although there has been much progress in the labor market since the spring, we will not lose sight of the millions of americans who remain out of work. looking ahead, fomc participants project the unemployment rate to continue to decline; the median projection is 5 percent at the end of next year and moves below 4 percent by 2023. the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. in particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the service sector and for african americans and hispanics. the economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. the pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. following large declines in the spring, consumer prices picked up over the summer but have leveled out more recently. for those sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, prices remain particularly soft. overall, on a 12-month basis, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer-run objective. the median inflation projection from fomc participants rises from 1.2 percent this year to 1.8 percent next year and reaches 2 percent in 2023. as we have emphasized throughout the pandemic, the outlook for the economy is extraordinarily uncertain and will depend in large part on the course of the virus. recent news on vaccines has been very positive. however, significant challenges and uncertainties remain with regard to the timing, production, and distribution of vaccines as well as their efficacy across  different groups. it remains difficult to assess the timing and scope of the economic implications of these developments. the ongoing surge in new covid-19 cases, both here in the united states and abroad, is particularly concerning, and the next few months are likely to be very challenging. all of us have a role to play in our nation’s response to the pandemic. following the advice of public health professionals to keep appropriate social distances and to wear masks in public will help get the economy back to full strength. a full economic recovery is unlikely until people are confident that it is safe to engage—reengage in a broad range of activities. as we previously announced, we are now releasing the entire package of our sep materials at the same time as our fomc statement. included in these materials are two new exhibits that show how the balance of participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks have evolved over time. since the onset of the pandemic, nearly all participants continue to judge the level of uncertainty about the economic outlook as elevated. in terms of risks to the outlook, fewer participants see the balance of risks as weighted to the downside than in september. while a little more than half of participants now judge risks to be broadly balanced for economic activity, a similar number continue to see risks weighted to the downside for inflation. the fed’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. as noted in our statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, we view maximum employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal. our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. as we reiterated in today’s statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and  longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. with regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, as we noted in today’s policy statement, we will continue to increase our holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. we believe the increase in our balance sheet this year has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. combined with our forward guidance for the federal funds rate, our enhanced balance sheet guidance will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. our guidance is outcome based and is tied to progress toward reaching our employment and inflation goals. thus, if progress toward our goals were to slow, the guidance would convey our intention to increase policy accommodation through a lower expected path of the federal funds rate and a higher expected path of the balance sheet. overall, our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so. the federal reserve has also been taking broad and forceful actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy for households, for businesses large and small, and for state and local governments. preserving the flow of credit is essential for mitigating damage to  the economy and promoting a robust recovery. many of our programs rely on emergency lending powers that require the support of the treasury department and are available only in very unusual circumstances, such as those we find ourselves in today. these programs serve as a backstop to key credit markets and have helped to restore the flow of credit from private lenders through normal channels. we have deployed these lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from congress and the treasury. although funds from the cares act will not be available to support new loans or new purchases after—of assets after december 31, the treasury could authorize support for emerging lending facilities, if needed, through the exchange stabilization fund. when the time comes, after the crisis has passed, we will put these emergency tools back in the box. as i have emphasized before, these are lending powers, not spending powers. the fed cannot grant money to particular beneficiaries. we can only create programs or facilities with broad-based eligibility to make loans to solvent entities with the expectation that the loans will be repaid. many borrowers are benefiting from these programs, as is the overall economy. but for many others, getting a loan that may be difficult to repay may not be the answer. in these cases, direct fiscal support may be needed. elected officials have the power to tax and spend and to make decisions about where we, as a society, should direct our collective resources. the fiscal policy actions that have been taken thus far have made a critical difference to families, businesses, and communities across the country. even so, the current economic downturn is the most severe of our lifetimes. it will take a while to get back to the levels of economic activity and employment that prevailed at the beginning of this year, and it may take continued support from both monetary and fiscal policy to achieve that.  to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. thank you. rich miller. rich miller. thank you very much, mr. chairman. thank you, michelle. i wonder if i could start with the, the sep. we have—unemployment now is at 6.7, the sep median sees, sees it falling to 5. headline inflation is one time 1.2, the sep median sees it rising to 1.8. and core inflation is 1.4, and the sep sees it rising to 1.8 likewise. would that constitute “substantial further progress” toward the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals? chair powell. yes. well, so we’re not—we’re not going to be identifying specific—associating that test with, with specific numbers at this point. so, really, the question is, what do we mean by, by that language? and, really, the overarching message, rich, is that our guidance for both interest rates and asset purchases will keep monetary policy accommodative until our maximum-employment and price-stability goals are achieved, and that’s, that’s a powerful message. so “substantial further progress” means what it says. it means we’ll be looking for employment to be substantially closer to assessments of its maximum level and inflation to be substantially closer to our 2 percent longer-run goal before we start making adjustments to our purchases. i would also point out that by increasing our asset holdings, we see ourselves as adding policy accommodation. there will come a time when the economy does not require increasing amounts of policy accommodation. and when that time comes—and that will be uncertain and, in any case, is, is some ways off. so i can’t give you an exact set of numbers. we will—of  course, as we approach that point, we’ll be evaluating that. and when we see ourselves on a path to achieve that goal, then we will—we will say so undoubtedly well in advance of any time when we would actually consider gradually tapering the pace of purchases. rich miller. very quickly on, on that. you, you mentioned the next couple months are going to be very challenging. and regarding asset purchases, why not increase the duration of the asset purchases at this time, given what you see as a very challenging period ahead? chair powell. so, you know, again, i would start with what we actually did at the meeting, which, which was, we provided this, this guidance about the path of asset purchases. and i just went through what, what they—what they—the guidance that we put forward. and, you know, so i guess since september we’ve now adopted a flexible average inflation-targeting framework. we have provided rate guidance that is tightly linked to the goals as expressed in that new framework. and now we’ve done the same for, for asset purchases. so, you know, we’ve, we’ve been sort of—as, as the future has become clearer and as we’ve absorbed new developments in medical—in the medical sphere and also in, in the economy, we have—began to be able to see further. so we’ve, we’ve started to be able to provide further important guidance. and we think that the—that the asset purchase guidance, guidance is very important. we think that the, the prior language of “in coming months” was obviously temporary. this links that guidance, those purchases, to actual “substantial further progress” toward our, our mandated goals. we think that’s important. and we think that that is important to have done. i, i would just add, though, that we also continue to think that our current policy stance is appropriate. we think it’s providing a great deal of support for the economy. financial conditions are highly accommodative. and, you know, we monitor a range of financial condition indexes. there are many of them, and they’ll, they’ll all pretty much tell you that.  you can—you can also look at the interest sensitive parts of the economy—for example, housing, durable sales, vehicle sales—those parts of the economy are, are performing very, very well. the parts of the economy that are weak are the service-sector businesses that involve close contact. those are not being held back by financial conditions, but rather by the spread of the virus. and i’ll close by, by just saying, we do have the flexibility to provide more accommodation through the channel you mentioned and through other channels. and we recognize that circumstances could shift in a way that warrants our, our doing that, including by adjusting purchases. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the u.s. economy to achieve our goals. we will continue to use our tools to support the economy for as long as it takes until the job is well and truly done. no one should doubt that. rich miller. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. nick timiraos. nick timiraos. thank you. nick timiraos, the wall street journal. chair powell, a two-part question. what, if anything, would prompt the fed to shift treasury purchases toward the longer end of the curve as you did with your prior qe programs? and does your guidance today on asset purchases foreclose the possibility that you could, at some point, lengthen maturities while simultaneously tapering the monthly purchase amounts? chair powell. well, nick, i—on, on the first part of the question, i, i don’t—i wouldn’t want to sort of talk about hypothetical situations. you know, we, we look at our overall stance of policy, we look at overall financial conditions, we look at what’s going on in the economy—different parts of the economy, and we ask ourselves, should we change our policy stance? we do that at every meeting. and we look at where financial conditions are now,  and, and we, we feel that they are appropriate for now. anytime we feel like the economy could, could use stronger accommodation, we would be prepared to provide it. we—but right now, we’re providing a great deal, and we think—we happen to think it’s the right amount. and, you know, you, you mentioned—i think you’re referring to the idea of maintaining the duration but, but reducing the quantity, which is sort of what the bank of canada did. and that, that is something that we—you know, that we talked about in the last meeting and was addressed in the minutes. and i would say, the views on that were mixed: some thought it was an interesting idea, others not so much. i, i wouldn’t say that that’s something that’s, that’s high on our list of, of possibilities. nick timiraos. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. victoria. victoria guida. hi, victoria guida with politico. i wanted to ask about the 13(3) facilities. chair powell, you’ve said that you accept treasury secretary mnuchin’s interpretation of the statute of the cares act on, on what should happen with those programs. so, first of all, i’m curious whether under a new treasury secretary you will accept whatever legal interpretation they put forward for those programs. and then, also, given that there isn’t a statutory requirement for you to have financial backing from treasury for 13(3) facilities, do you have any plans for any future facilities that don’t require treasury backing? chair powell. so on your—on your first question, we really have not thought about that. we’re, we’re very focused on—we have a lot to do now. we, we have not focused on, on that question, and i, i really have nothing to add on that. your second question is—sorry. oh, if there were no—yes. no, we, we would have the ability—certainly, we would have the ability to do facilities under 13(3) in some cases with no backing. but we can’t do any 13(3) facilities  without the approval of the treasury secretary, right? but we did some facilities—i think one of our facilities this time didn’t have any treasury backing. and i think some in the—in the round of—during the global financial crisis also didn’t have any. victoria guida. so do you have any plans—like, would you consider doing more facilities if that became necessary without treasury backing? chair powell. i would say that we are—you know, we’re—we have the authorities we have. we will use them if, if they’re needed and if—and if the law permits us to do so. we would—we would always do that. we, we do not have any plans for, for the future about this. we—we’re very focused on, on getting through year-end. we’ve been very focused on, on the issues that are right in front of us. and, honestly, we’re not—we’re not planning on anything or having any discussions about what we might do down the road. victoria guida. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. steve liesman. steve liesman. thank you, mr. chairman, and happy new year. i know how much you enjoy talking about fiscal stimulus, so let me ask you directly about fiscal stimulus. there’s talk right now of a $900 billion fiscal stimulus program in congress. is, is that sufficient? is that what you’re looking for? do you think that’ll be sufficient for helping the economy? finally, you talked about the idea of how concerning the recent surge is. i wonder if you can put some detail on that. how much concern do you have in terms of, where could employment go? what could happen to gdp in the first quarter as a result of this surge? thank you. chair powell. okay. so on, on fiscal policy, i would just say a couple of things. the case for fiscal policy right now is, is very, very strong. and i think that is widely understood, i would say, now. the details of it are entirely up to congress. but with the  expiration of unemployment benefits—some of the unemployment benefits, the expiration of eviction moratoriums with the virus spreading the way it is, there’s a need for households and businesses to have, have fiscal support. and i do think that—again, i think that is widely understood. so i think it would be—i, i certainly would welcome the work that congress is doing right now. it’s not up to us to judge that work. it’s really, really theirs. and i, i don’t have a view for you on, on the size of it. it’s—you know, it’s obviously a substantial bill. on the surge, you know, so it’s a really interesting question. we have, and others too, have consistently expected there to be more economic—that, that cases would hold—growth in cases would hold back the economy more than it actually has. so we’ve overestimated the, the effects on the economy of, of these spikes we’ve been having. now, this spike is so much larger that i think—and i think forecasters generally do think that there—that this will have an effect on suppressing activity, particularly activity that involves people getting together in bars and restaurants, on airplanes and hotels and things like that. and you’re starting to see that. in the—in the high-frequency data, you’re now beginning to see that show up. and i think if this is—the case numbers are so high and so widespread across the country that that, that seems like it must happen. now, how big will it be? we don’t—we don’t really know. you know, there are—there are a lot of estimates. the general expectation is, you’re seeing some slowing now. and you’ll see the first quarter could well be—what, what we said is that coming months are going to be challenging. the first quarter will, will certainly show significant effects from this. at the same time, people are getting vaccinated now. they’re getting vaccinated. and by the end of the first quarter into the second quarter, you’re going to be seeing significant numbers of people vaccinated. and so then what will be—how will that play into economic  activity? again, we don’t have any experience with this. you have to think that sometime in the middle of next year, you will—you will see people feeling comfortable going out and engaging in a broader range of activities. and some people will be probably quick to do that. some are doing it now without a vaccine—right?—in many parts of the country. so, nonetheless, my expectation—and i think many people have the expectation that the second half of next year should—the economy should be performing strongly. we should be— you know, we should be getting people back to work. businesses should be reopening and that kind of thing. the issue is more the next four or five months—getting through the next four, five, six months. that is key. and, and, you know, clearly there’s going to be need for help there. and, and, you know, my sense and hope is that we’ll be getting that. michelle smith. thank you. jeanna smialek. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thank you for taking our questions. i was wondering if you could talk a little bit about house prices. they were mentioned in the most recent minutes as, you know, potentially a valuation concern, especially as it related to your mortgage-backed security purchases. and you mentioned earlier today that the housing market looks more or less fully healed. and so i guess i wonder, are you worried about valuation pressures there? and, if so, what can the fed do to contain those? chair powell. you know, so we monitor basically just about every asset price in the economy, and housing prices are something that we’ve been monitoring. and you see them moving up. you see very high demand. this, this is the housing market that people have been expecting since, you know, 2010. and, and then, you know, not many, when the—when the pandemic hit, thought, “oh, this is what—this is what will produce that housing market,” but it has.  now, i would say, from a financial stability standpoint, housing prices are not—are not of a level of concern right now. that’s just reflective of a lot of demand. and, you know, builders are going to bring forth supply. there’s also a sense that this—some of this may be pent-up demand from when the economy was closed, which would imply that demand—once that demand is met, that the real level of demand will be more manageable. so it’s a—it’s a healthy economy now. we, we met recently with a bunch of homebuilders, and many of them in the business 30, 40 years said they’ve never seen the likes of it. but, no, housing prices themselves are not—are not a financial stability concern at the moment. we will watch that carefully. but in the near term, i wouldn’t think that that’s an issue that we’d be concerned about. jeanna smialek. thanks. michelle smith. thank you. edward lawrence. edward lawrence. thank you for the question, mr. chairman. so with the actions that you’ve currently taken, how do you—how do you further fight a slowdown that you’re seeing? we’ve talked about the retail sales numbers are a little bit sluggish this month, the unemployment, the job growth has slowed down. is there more the fed can do to fight this? or is it now squarely in the congress’s realm? chair powell. there is more that we can do, certainly. we can—we can expand our, our asset purchase programs. we can focus them more on the longer end. there are a number of options we would have to provide more support to the economy. so i would—i would say, though, that in the near term, the help that people need isn’t just from low interest rates that stimulates demand over time and works with long and variable lags. it’s really support. as the—as—we’ve, we’ve talked about this as all of these government  policies trying to work together to create a bridge across this chasm, economic chasm that was created by the pandemic. and for many americans, that bridge is there and, and they’re across it. but there’s a group for, for which they, they don’t have a bridge yet. and that’s who we’re talking about here. it’s, it’s the 10 million people who lost their jobs. it’s people who may lose their homes. it’s—you know, you see the, the—many, many millions of americans are, are waiting in food lines in their cars these days all over the country. so we know there’s need out there. we know there are small businesses all over the country that, that have been basically unable to really function, and they’re just hanging on. so—and, and they’re, they’re so critical to our economy. so—and, by the way, now that we can—we can kind of see the light at the end of the tunnel, it would be—it would be bad to see, you know, people losing their business, their life’s work in many cases, or even generations’ worth of work, because they couldn’t last another few months, which is what it amounts to. so we have more we can do. and we’ll—i, i think more the issue is, we’re going to need to continue to provide support to this economy for quite a period of time, because the, the economy will be growing in expectation. we should be growing at a fairly healthy clip by the second half of next year. but it’s going to be a while before we really are back to the levels of, of labor market—the, the sort of conditions in the labor market that we had in early this year and for much of the last couple of years. so that’s how i think about it. edward lawrence. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. howard schneider.  howard schneider. hi, chair powell. thanks for doing this. and thanks, michelle. two, two quick questions. one, on the vaccine, do you have, or has the fed modeled, sort of a working estimate of when the u.s. might reach something approaching herd immunity? and, secondly, if you could, please connect with me the lack of movement on the decision to maintain the current pace and quantities of bond purchases with the fact that the seps are showing three years with inflation not reaching 2 percent. some might argue that you need to do more to start fixing those expectations, and to let this drift and say “we’re going to miss our target for another three years” doesn’t show a very firm commitment to the new framework. chair powell. so, in terms of the vaccine, yes, you know, we do estimates of, of when the united states would reach herd immunity, and they’re, they’re going to be similar to what other people think. you know, it depends on your assumptions, such as how many people will actually take the vaccine and how fast will the rollout be. so it’s assumption based on assumption based on assumption. but, you know, sometime—it’s possible sometime in the middle or second half of next year. i’m not going to try to be precise, because it’s just another estimate. you know, our people are very good, but they’re looking at, at the same data as other people are. and so, you know, all the estimates are—it depends on what your assumptions are. but under a normal set of assumptions, it could happen as, as soon as the middle of next year. in terms of the, you know, inflation, a couple things—your second question. you know, we’re—i think you have to be honest with yourself about, about inflation these days. there are—there are significant disinflationary pressures around the world, and there have been for a while, and they persist today. it’s, is not going to be easy to have inflation move up. and it isn’t going to be just a question—it’s going to take some time. it took a long time to get inflation back to 2 percent in the last crisis.  and, you know, we’re, we’re honest with ourselves and with you in the sep that even with the very high level of accommodation that we’re providing both through low rates and very high levels of asset purchases, it will take some time, because that’s what we believe the underlying inflation dynamics are in our economy. and that’s sort of why we’re—one reason why we’re concerned about inflation is that we see that. and, and that’s why we have adopted the flexible average inflation-targeting framework. that’s why we’re aiming for an overshoot. but we’re, we’re honest with ourselves and with the public that it will take some time to get there. in terms of, you know, would, would it really speed it up a lot to, to move asset purchases, you know, i don’t think that would really be—i think it’s going to take a long time however you do it. and, you know, we’ve been having very long expansions since—in, in the last several decades because inflation has not—really, the old model was, inflation would come along and the fed would tighten, and we’d have a recession. now inflation has been low, and we haven’t had that dynamic. and the result has been three of the four longest expansions in, in modern history, in recorded history. so, you know, we’re, we’re thinking that this could be another long expansion, and that we’ll keep our—what we’re saying is, we’re going to keep policy highly accommodative until the expansion is well down the tracks. and we’re not going to preemptively raise rates until we see inflation actually reaching 2 percent and being on track to exceed 2 percent. that’s a very strong commitment, and we think that’s the right place to be. howard schneider. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. chris rugaber. i’m sorry, mr. chair.  chair powell. i’m just going to add, markets have actually found this fairly credible. if you look at what—at inflation compensation and at the survey measures of, of when the fed will lift off, everything has moved. there have been significant movements since we announced the framework in the direction that is consistent with the—with the framework being credible to market participants. so i, i don’t think it’s something that—i, i mean, i’m actually pleased by, by the reception it’s gotten in markets. and markets have moved in ways that suggest it is credible. michelle smith. thank you. chris. christopher rugaber. hi, thank you. yesterday, i guess, the fed said that it is joining the international financial greening group. and i just wanted to see if you could expand on how the fed is thinking about climate change and how it might affect fed policy going forward. specifically, i think janet yellen drew a distinction between considering climate change when it comes to financial regulation. but how do you see that also potentially affecting monetary policy? obviously, there have been criticisms of the fed for buying bonds of oil and gas companies. but leaving that specific case aside, i mean, are there—is there any way that climate change considerations could affect monetary policy going forward? chair powell. so the—you’re, you’re talking about the—sorry, the network [of central banks and supervisors] for greening the financial system, which we joined this week. and i’ll just—i’ll just say a couple things about that. so, first, i’ll just start by saying that we’re going to move carefully and thoughtfully on developing an understanding of how climate change affects our work, including the areas you mentioned. we’re going to do so with a great deal of engagement with all of our external constituencies, including the public and their elected representatives who are charged with our oversight. we’ll do it with great transparency.  remember that we are a nonpolitical agency whose goals and authorities to achieve those goals are set by congress. we have great responsibilities and strong authorities that we’ll use vigorously. we’re not the forum where all the great issues of the day are to be hashed out, debated, and addressed unless and only to the extent that those issues are directly relevant to our statutory goals and are addressable through our legal authorities. and because we have a narrow remit, and because we stick to it, congress has given us a precious grant of independence from direct political control. so society’s broad response to climate change is for others to decide—in particular, elected leaders. but—so let me—let me get to your question. what does all that mean for an issue like climate change? and why did we join the ngfs? so congress hasn’t explicitly assigned us or other financial regulators a role, and we’re not among the agencies who contribute to the national climate assessment—climate assessment, for example. but climate change is nonetheless relevant to our existing mandates under the law. and let me tell you why. one of our jobs is to regulate and supervise banks and to look after the stability of the financial system. that’s a responsibility we share with other agencies. the public will expect that we will—we will do that. so we’ll, we’ll expect that, that those important institutions will be resilient against the many resists—risks that they fake—face: credit risk, market risk, cyber risk. climate change is an emerging risk to financial institutions, the financial system, and the economy. and we are, as so many others are, in the very early stages of understanding what that means, what needs to be done about it, and by whom. that’s why 83 central banks have joined together to share research and identify best practices in this important emerging area. we’ve been attending ngfs meetings as an observer for more than a year, taking part in the work. we had discussed that it was probably time to join as a member.  i’ll just say that the financial system is really a global one. it’s important that we work and discuss best practices with peer agencies around the world, especially in a field where we’re just beginning to develop our, our understanding. you asked about monetary policy. you know, i—i’ll say this. we, we have historically shied away strongly from taking a role in credit allocation. in fact, our agreement with treasury during the financial crisis from back in 2009 or ’10 says that we will avoid credit allocation. it’s something we’ve carefully avoided. so i, i would be very reluctant to see us move in that direction, picking one area as creditworthy and another not. so you asked about monetary policy. you know, it’s, it’s—for now, i would say the real—the real concern is—the real place to focus, for me, is supervision of financial institutions and then financial stability concerns. you can see a connection there. monetary policy, maximum employment, stable prices—it’s less obvious to me. i can—i can, you know—i can make the argument, but it’s less obvious to me that those should be first-order things that we would look at in connection with climate change. but i think there’s—i think there’s work to be done to understand the connection between climate change and the strength and resilience of financial markets and financial institutions. i think that work is in its early days. and, again, we’ll be careful. we’ll be thorough and transparent and, and engage with the public on all that. christopher rugaber. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. rachel siegel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. thanks very much for taking my question. and thank you, michelle. i wanted to ask specifically about state and local aid. just as one example, the governor of illinois announced roughly $700 million in early anticipated budget cuts to close the budget deficit, and the latest bipartisan stimulus proposal that’s being debated this week  seems to be leaving out state and local aid at this point. and i’m just curious if you can give some detail about the damage that these budget deficits or the lack of aid specifically to state and local governments will have on the recovery and, specifically, with the municipal lending facility set to expire, what more the fed might be able to do to fill that specific hole. thanks very much. chair powell. okay. so the state and local governments, they provide important critical services: safety, fire, police, health, all kinds of things like that. they’re, they’re really involved in people’s lives, state and local governments are, to, to a large extent. the decision whether to, to provide more fiscal support to them is entirely in the hands of congress. and, you know, they’re in the middle of these discussions, and, and those, those are issues for them to decide. i would say that the picture is mixed. what’s happened is, if you’re a state that has a significant exposure to tourism or to extracting energy from the ground—oil from the ground, or gas—you are probably, at least in those industries, feeling a significant loss of revenue. a number of other states have been surprised on the upside, where—and that’s because goods sales, for example—property taxes are—don’t move much year to year. and, you know, the kind of sales taxes on goods—goods sales have been very high. income has been more or less replaced by, by the cares act—fully replaced, more than, in many cases. so the concerns that we had at the very beginning of really serious, deep shortfalls and massive budget cuts on the part of state and local governments have not yet—have not yet occurred. what we’re seeing is, is that it’s different state to state. and some states are having significant difficulties, others not so much. the real concern, though, that still emerges is, state and local governments are very large employers, and—one of the largest. and so far, since the pandemic began, employment has  dropped by 1.3 million in—of state and local government. so it’s, it’s a very large number of people to be—to be out of work from just that one source. it’s actually significantly more than lost their jobs during the global financial crisis. so that is—that is a significant—a significant part of that group is, is in education. so when the schools reopen, a significant part of that 1.3 million would go back to work. nonetheless, it’s a concern. we’re, we’re watching carefully to understand why that—why that many people have been let go and what are—really are the sources. so we’re monitoring it carefully, and it’s a mixed picture. and i, i just have to leave the question of what to do with fiscal policy on this to congress. michelle smith. thank you. james politi. james politi. thank you, michelle. and thank you, chair powell. you and the fed have consistently said that the fed is ready to provide the economy with more monetary support if needed and really stressed to policymakers generally that the dangers of not doing enough outweigh the risks of doing too much in a situation where there’s so much suffering in the economy. the guidance today sort of cements asset purchases for a longer period of time but is not a big new easing step. why was now, with the short-term outlook deteriorating due to the new coronavirus surges, not the moment for a big new easing step? and is it because of the medium-term outlook improving? or is it because the fed just doesn’t have the capacity to sort of build that bridge over the next four to five months for the—for the people who are struggling? chair powell. right. so i, i could go back, james, to what i said earlier, which is, this is—this is a very, very large asset purchase program. it’s providing a tremendous amount of, of support for the economy. if you look at the interest-sensitive parts of the economy, they’re performing very well. the parts that are not performing well are not struggling from high  interest rates. they’re struggling from exposure to, to covid, in a sense. these are—these are the businesses that, that are really hit hard by people’s reluctance to gather closely. so, so we, we do have the ability to—you know, to buy more bonds or to buy longer-term bonds. and, and we may—we may use it. i’m not saying we won’t—we won’t use that. it may well come to, to using that. but also, i would remind—i would also note, though, monetary policy works with “long and variable lags,” is the famous statement. so we think that the big effects from monetary policy are, you know, months and months into the future. so this looks like a—you know, it looks like a time when what is really needed is fiscal policy. and, and that’s why it is, is a very positive thing that, that we’re getting that. so we, we remain open to doing—you know, to, to either increasing the size of our asset purchases, if that turns out to be appropriate, or to just moving the maturities, moving to buying longer maturities, because that had—that also increases accommodation by taking more duration risk out of the market. but we think our current stance is appropriate. and we think that our— you know, that our, our guidance on asset purchases today will also provide support to the economy over time. again, what we’ve—what we’ve done is, we’ve laid out a path whereby we’re going to keep monetary policy highly accommodative for a long time, really until—really until we reach very close to our goals, which is not, you know, not really the way it’s been done in the past. so that’s, that’s providing significant support for the economy now. we don’t think the economy suffers from a lack of, of highly accommodative financial conditions. we think it’s suffering from the pandemic and people wanting to not engage in certain kinds of economic activity. and we expect that, that with the virus, that that will improve—that condition will improve. nonetheless, again, we will—are prepared to use our  tools, and we will use them at such time and in such amounts as we—as we think would, would help. michelle smith. thank you. scott horsley, npr. scott horsley. thank you, mr. chairman. some forecasters have suggested that there is a lot of pent-up demand for travel and entertainment and, and services and the like that might stop being pent up in a hurry if we do get to a point where the vaccine is widely distributed, and that the beaten-down service sector might have trouble meeting that demand in, in a hurry. how might that affect inflation, in your mind? and would that be just a transient problem or, or something that might warrant closer scrutiny? chair powell. so that, that has all the markings of a transient increase in the price level. so you can imagine that as people really want to travel again—let’s say, you know, that airfare, airfares—i’m just imagining this, right?—that they go up. but what inflation is, is a process whereby they go up year upon year upon year upon year. and if—given the inflation dynamics that we’ve had over the last several decades, just a single, single sort of price-level increase has not resulted in ongoing price-level increases. and that, that was—the problem back in the 1970s was, it was the combination of two things. one, when unemployment went down and resources got tight, prices started going up. but the second problem was that that—that that increase was persistent, there was a level of persistence. so if prices went up 6 percent this year, they’d go up 6 percent next year, because people would internalize. i mean, really, really, that’s what happens is, people internalize that they can raise prices, and that it’s okay to pay prices that are going up at that rate. so that was the inflation—those are the inflation dynamics of that era.  those dynamics are not in place anymore. there—the connection between low unemployment or other resource utilization and inflation is so much weaker than it was. it’s still there, but it’s a—it’s a faint heartbeat compared to what it was. and the persistence of inflation, if you—if you get a—for example, oil prices go up, and that’ll send a temporary shock through the economy. the persistence of that into, into inflation over time is just not there. so they— what you describe may happen, and, of course, we would watch it very carefully. we, we understand that we will always be learning new things from the economy about how it will behave in certain cases. but i would—i would expect, though, going in that that would be a one-time price increase rather than an increase in underlying inflation that would be persistent. scott horsley. so not the kind of thing that the fed would, would be trigger-happy to, to— chair powell. no. scott horsley. —respond to? chair powell. no, no. definitely not. michelle smith. thank you. michael derby. michael derby. [inaudible]—question. but what i wanted to ask was, you know, given the size of all the government borrowing and, you know, different regulatory changes in the financial sector, do you think that the treasury market, long run, can operate smoothly without some sort of active fed presence—you know, buying treasury debt? you know, i’m referring back to [inaudible] randal quarles. he had some questions about it. so i wanted to know where you stood on that issue. chair powell. right. so—you were breaking up a little. i think—i think i got the sense of it, though. yes, i, i don’t think it’s at all a foregone conclusion that there needs to be a  permanent fed presence. and we certainly don’t—you know, that’s not something we’re planning on or intending. right now we’re buying assets because it’s a—you know, it’s a—it’s a time when the economy needs highly accommodative monetary policy, and we think our asset purchases are, you know, one of the main delivery mechanisms for that, the size of the balance sheet. you know, there’s lots of demand for, for u.s. treasury paper all—from all over the world. and i, i think we need to be thoughtful about the structure of the treasury market and look at ways to make sure that the capacity is there for it to be handled by the private sector. and there’s, there’s quite a lot of work going on on that front. but i, i don’t presume at all that, that this is something that needs to be—where the fed needs to be in there at all. i, i would think that this should be handled by the private sector and can be. institutions need to be able to hold this paper. and there may be—there may be a central clearing angle that would, you know, net a lot of risk. that’s, that’s yet to be proven. there are a lot of things that are being looked at right now. michael derby. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. hannah lang. hannah lang. hi, hi. thanks so much for taking our questions. so, you know, as you know, the pandemic has really disproportionately impacted small and medium-sized businesses. and the fed launched a few efforts this year to—through its 13(3) programs to reach out to those companies. but, you know, considering that some of those programs are ending, is there anything else that the fed’s actions can do to provide support to those companies? or is that solely congress’s domain?  chair powell. i think the main thing that those companies need is a—is a robust recovery—a strong, robust recovery. and so we, we contribute to that through highly accommodative monetary policy, through accommodative financial conditions that are supporting economic activity. health authorities are contributing to that through, through, you know, management of the spread of the virus and now through vaccines and the delivery of those vaccines. and congress contributes, contributes to that by helping them make it through this very difficult time. and, and i think my understanding is that there’s support for small businesses in, in what’s being discussed on capitol hill. i would certainly think that would be something well worth looking at. michelle smith. thank you. paul la monica. paul la monica. hi, chair powell—hi, chair powell. i was wondering if you’ve had any conversations yet with any members of the incoming biden administration, particularly janet yellen, who obviously you can share some similar experience in running the fed. so just curious to get your thoughts on how the relationship with treasury and the new administration might differ than the past couple of years. chair powell. so, you know, we’ve had a—and i’ve had sort of the typical meetings with the transition team for treasury. they’ve met with quite a lot of people in our agency and other agencies. and, really, it’s about learning what we do. and i, i really have only spoken to former chair yellen to congratulate her on being nominated and just to say that i look forward to working with her. you know, i did work very closely with her for five years before she left and have stayed in touch, you know. so i did that. but i have not discussed, you know, policy with her. and i, i’m not going to do that until she’s confirmed. michelle smith. great, thank you. jeff cox.  jeff cox. yes. chair, thank you for taking the question. you’ve been asked this question before in various forms. i’m going to try it a little bit differently now. the equity market and the bond market seem to be telling two different stories about where, where things are heading. we [inaudible] on the stock market, bond yields remain very low. does that concern you at all? are, are you getting any more concerned about asset valuations in, in light of the highly accommodative fed policies? chair powell. you, you were breaking up, but i, i think i got that. i think i got it. so, you know, financial stability—we, we look at a broad range of things. we actually have a framework so that we can, you know, be—evaluate changes in financial stability over time, and so that the public can evaluate whether we’re doing a job—a good job at it. we—so what do we look at? asset prices is one thing that we look at. and, you know, we published a report a few weeks ago on that—maybe it was month or so ago. anyway. and i think you’ll find a mixed bag there. it depends—with equities, it depends on whether you’re looking at p/es or whether you’re looking at the premium over risk-free—over the risk-free return. if you look at p/es, they’re historically high, but, you know, in a world where the— where the risk-free rate is sustain—is going to be low for a sustained period, the equity premium, which is really the reward you get for taking equity risk, would be what you’d look at. and that’s not at, at incredibly low levels, which would mean that they’re not overpriced in that sense. admittedly, p/es are high, but that’s—you know, that’s, that’s maybe not as relevant in a world where we think the 10-year treasury is going to be lower than it’s been historically, from a—from a return perspective. you know, we look at—we also look at borrowing—leverage of financial institutions. we spent 10 years and the banks spent 10 years building up their capital. so far, they’ve been a  source of strength through this crisis, and their capital has held up well. we look at leverage in the nonfinancial sector—that’s households and nonfinancial corporates. nonfinancial corporate leverage is high. we’ve been watching that. but, you know, rates are really low. so—and so companies have been able to handle their debt loads even in weak periods, because rates are— rates are quite low. your interest payments are low. defaults and downgrades have, have declined since earlier in the year. households came into this very strong, and there certainly has been a hit there for people who are unemployed. but, you know, with the cares act, congress replaced a lot of lost income. you know, it’s very important that, that the economy gets strong again. i mean, the, the ultimate thing to support financial stability is a strong economy. the last thing is, is really funding markets. we found that there was a lot of unstable funding for companies, particularly financial companies. and that’s, that’s down to a—to a very low level these days. so the broad financial stability picture is, is kind of mixed, i would say. i would say, you know, asset prices are, are a little high in that metric and in my view. but, overall, you have a mixed picture. you, you don’t have, you know, a lot of red flags on that. so—and it’s—again, it’s something that we monitor essentially ongoing, almost daily. you know, we’re, we’re monitoring these prices for that and, and have published our, our framework, and, you know, we’ll be held accountable for what we saw and what we missed. so we work very hard at it. michelle smith. thank you. and for the last question we’ll go to michael mckee. michael mckee. mr. chairman, i have a couple of questions about the fiscal support for the economy. this year’s budget deficit is $3.1 trillion. and republicans have argued they don’t want to spend more, because we can’t afford it. so i’m wondering if you can  make the case for how much we can afford. at what point do deficits and the debt start to have an impact on the economy or on interest rates? and how would we know when we get there? chair powell. so people who—people who run for elected office and win, they’re the ones—their reward is they get to make those very difficult decisions. and—you know, so we’re not charged with providing fiscal advice to, to congress. but i, i would just say, as a general—as a general rule, it is important to be on a sustainable fiscal path. for my way of thinking and many others’, the time to focus on that is when the economy is strong and when unemployment is low and taxes are—you know, are, are pouring in, and there’s, there’s room to get on—get on a sustainable path, because the economy’s really doing well. you’re still now in the—in the, you know, some part of, of an economic crisis. and the fact that congress is debating a fairly large bill today suggests that, that—you know, suggests that something fairly substantial is going to get done, we hope—that what’s being discussed is, you know, is, is of some size. in terms of what is a sustainable level, i think, you know, it’s—the question is—we’ve always looked at debt to gdp, and we’re very high by that measure. by some other measures, we’re actually not that high. in particular, you can look at the real interest rate payments, the amount of, what does it cost? and from that standpoint, if you—if you sort of take real interest costs of the federal deficit and divide that by gdp, we’re actually—you know, we’re actually on a more sustainable fiscal path if you look at it through those eyes. again, these are—these are issues for congress. but, you know, i’ll just say in the near term, i think fiscal—the case for, for fiscal is, is strong. and i’m certainly hoping—i think it will be very good for the economy if, if we did get something soon.  michael mckee. well, the argument for continuing to spend is that low interest rates make it affordable. do you worry you get in a situation where you would have congressional interference in monetary policymaking or at least feel significant political pressure to keep rates low because the country can’t afford to pay a significant interest bill? chair powell. yeah, i mean, that’s—i think we’re a very, very long way from that. you know, the, the congress has given the fed independence on the condition that we stick to our knitting. we try very hard to do that. and i, i think that’s, that’s what people call fiscal dominance. and i, i think we’re just a very, very long way from that. i think, you know, if we—if we do our jobs well and support the economy and achieve maximum employment and stable prices, keep the financial system stable, i don’t think that that is something that will—that i would worry about, certainly not in the near term. michelle smith. thank you very much. chair powell. thank you. michelle smith. good afternoon.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 3 4 page 2 federal open market committee  elizabeth k. kiser, associate director, division of research and statistics, board of governors eric c. engstrom, deputy associate director, division of monetary affairs, board of governors; norman j. morin, karen m. pence, and john m. roberts, deputy associate directors, division of research and statistics, board of governors; jeffrey d. walker,4 deputy associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board of governors brian j. bonis and dan li, assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board of governors penelope a. beattie,3 section chief, office of the secretary, board of governors; lubomir petrasek, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board of governors david h. small, project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors heather a. wiggins,4 group manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors michele cavallo and erin e. ferris, principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board of governors kyungmin kim4 and arsenios skaperdas,4 senior economists, division of monetary affairs, board of governors courtney demartini,4 lead financial institution and policy analyst, division of monetary affairs, board of governors randall a. williams, lead information manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors becky c. bareford, first vice president, federal reserve bank of richmond kartik b. athreya, joseph w. gruber, sylvain leduc, anna paulson, daleep singh, and christopher j. waller, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of richmond, kansas city, san francisco, chicago, new york, and st. louis, respectively todd e. clark, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of cleveland jonathan p. mccarthy, matthew nemeth,4 giovanni olivei, rania perry,4 matthew d. raskin,4 jonathan l. willis, and patricia zobel, vice presidents, federal reserve banks of new york, new york, boston, new york, new york, atlanta, and new york, respectively robert lerman,4 assistant vice president, federal reserve bank of new york lisa stowe,4 markets officer, federal reserve bank of new york developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager of the system open market account (soma) turned first to a discussion of financial market developments. market sentiment improved over the period, as reduced uncertainty related to the u.s. election and positive vaccine news outweighed the anticipated effect of the ongoing surge in the pandemic. u.s. equity price indexes reached all-time highs, with the largest gains registered in sectors that have underperformed during the pandemic. corporate credit spreads tightened, most notably among lower-rated firms and in sectors most affected by social distancing measures resulting from the pandemic. longer-term treasury yields rose modestly, driven by increases in inflation compensation. the positive vaccine news also supported risk sentiment abroad, leading many global equity price indexes to advance and the u.s. dollar to depreciate further. market participants had highlighted that uncertainty nevertheless remained high and had pointed to several prominent risks to the economic outlook. these risks included the possibility that the vaccine rollout might not proceed as smoothly as anticipated, the potential for adverse developments in negotiations concerning the united kingdom’s withdrawal from the european union, and the potential for deterioration in already strained sectors, such as those involving small businesses and certain segments of commercial real estate (cre). with regard to market expectations concerning the policy outlook, responses to the open market desk surveys of dealers and market participants suggested that views on the most likely timing of the next increase in the target range for the federal funds rate coalesced further around the first half of 2024. survey responses continued to indicate median expectations of headline personal consumption expenditures (pce) inflation above 2 percent and an unemployment rate of around 4 percent at minutes of the meeting of december 15–16, 2020 page 3  the time of the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate. a majority of desk survey respondents indicated that they expected the committee to revise its guidance on asset purchases at the current meeting, with many noting that they anticipated the announcement of some form of qualitative, outcomebased guidance tied to inflation, the unemployment rate, or both. median desk survey responses continued to suggest expectations that purchases would begin to slow in the first half of 2022 and cease altogether in 2023. paid for dollar funding crossing year-end generally were below those observed in recent years. money market futures also indicated expectations of short-term rates moving down modestly in coming months, in light of anticipated further increases in aggregate reserve balances and a moderation in treasury bill supply. the manager anticipated that administered rates and the overnight reverse repo program would be effective tools for maintaining control of overnight money market rates. the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet increased to around $7.3 trillion over the intermeeting period, driven by growth in securities holdings. the desk conducted purchases to increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) at the minimum pace directed by the fomc, as markets for these securities continued to function smoothly. news that cares act (coronavirus aid, relief, and economic security act) funding would not be available to support new activity in section 13(3) facilities after the end of the year had only a modest effect on financial markets. new activity remained limited across most federal reserve funding operations and section 13(3) facilities, although the municipal liquidity facility and the main street lending program saw growing usage over the period, with more take-up expected before their scheduled year-end termination. by unanimous vote, the committee voted to approve a resolution that extended through september 30, 2021, the expiration of a temporary repo facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (fima repo facility). 5 the manager discussed a proposal to extend the temporary u.s. dollar liquidity swap arrangements as well as the temporary fima (foreign and international monetary authorities) repo facility through september 2021. the path to a complete economic recovery remained uncertain across the globe, particularly for many emerging market countries, underscoring the need for backstops that could address potential market stresses and prevent spillovers from reemerging. keeping these arrangements in place would contribute to sustaining improvements in global dollar funding markets and to the continued smooth functioning of the u.s. treasury securities market. under the proposal, provided that the committee had no objections, the chair would approve the extension of the temporary liquidity swap lines following the meeting. the extensions of the swap and fima repurchase agreement (repo) arrangements would be announced following this meeting. staff review of the economic situation the covid-19 pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activity in the united states and abroad. the information available at the time of the december 15–16 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) was continuing to recover in the fourth quarter, but at a more moderate pace than its rapid third-quarter rate, and that the level of real gdp remained well below its level at the start of 2020. labor market conditions improved further over october and november, although employment continued to be well below its level at the beginning of the year. consumer price inflation through october—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the pce price index—remained notably below the rates seen in early 2020. market participants generally anticipated calm money market conditions through year-end, and the premiums the approved fima desk resolution, which updates the july 2020 resolution with a new expiration date, is available along with other committee organizational documents at 5 secretary’s note: the chair subsequently provided approval to the desk, following the procedures in the authorization for foreign currency operations, to extend the expiration of the temporary u.s. dollar liquidity swap lines through september 30, 2021. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. total nonfarm payroll employment continued to increase solidly over october and november, though the rate of monthly job gains was more moderate than the substantial third-quarter pace. through november, . page 4 federal open market committee  payroll employment had regained somewhat more than half of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. the unemployment rate moved down further and stood at 6.7 percent in november. the unemployment rates for african americans and hispanics each declined but remained well above the national average. both the labor force participation rate and the employment-topopulation ratio in november were above their levels of two months earlier. the four-week moving average of initial claims for unemployment insurance was only slightly lower in early december than it had been in late october. weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by federal reserve board staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp suggested that the four-week average of private employment gains in early december was lower than it was in mid-november. both the 12-month change in average hourly earnings for all employees through november and the fourquarter change in total labor compensation per hour in the business sector through the third quarter continued to be dominated by changes in the composition of the workforce. the substantial employment losses over the past year were most significant among lower-wage workers—a situation that had led to outsized increases in these average measures of earnings and compensation that were not indicative of tight labor market conditions. total pce price inflation was 1.2 percent over the 12 months ending in october, and it continued to be held down by relatively weak aggregate demand and the declines in consumer energy prices seen earlier in 2020. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 1.4 percent over the same period, while the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 1.7 percent in october. in november, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 1.2 percent, while core cpi inflation was 1.6 percent over the same period. the latest readings on surveybased measures of longer-run inflation expectations edged up, though each remained within the range in which it has fluctuated in recent years; in november and early december, the university of michigan surveys of consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years was slightly above its level in october, while the 3-year-ahead measure produced by the federal reserve bank of new york rose a bit in november. real pce rose strongly in october, though at a more moderate pace than in the third quarter. real disposable personal income declined in october, reflecting a large reduction in government transfer payments, even though wage and salary income continued to climb. as a result, the personal saving rate moved lower, though it continued to be notably above its 2019 average. in november, the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate pce, along with the rate of light motor vehicle sales, stepped down, possibly reflecting the effects on consumer spending of renewed socialdistancing measures and concerns about the resurgent pandemic. consumer sentiment, as measured by both the michigan survey and the conference board, moved somewhat lower, on net, since october, although both indexes were still above their april troughs. housing-sector activity advanced further, on balance, in october, supported in part by low interest rates. starts and construction permits for single-family homes continued to rise, while starts of multi-family units moved sideways. sales of existing homes increased solidly, though new home sales were roughly flat. business fixed investment appeared to be expanding further, on net, in the fourth quarter following an outsized third-quarter increase. nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft rose strongly in october, and new orders for these capital goods continued to advance. by contrast, nominal spending on nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector declined further in october. the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business spending on structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to move up somewhat through early december, although the number of rigs in operation was still subdued, reflecting the effect of low oil prices on drilling investment. industrial production rose strongly over october and november, led by gains in manufacturing output, but production was still below its february pre-pandemic level. the pickup in the production of motor vehicles and related parts was particularly strong in november. output in the mining sector—which includes crude oil and natural gas drilling and extraction—increased, on net, over october and november. total real government purchases appeared to be declining moderately, on balance, in the fourth quarter. federal defense spending continued to rise in october and november, although federal employment declined with the layoff of temporary census workers. state and local government payrolls decreased in october and november, and nominal state and local construction expenditures in october were somewhat below their third-quarter level. minutes of the meeting of december 15–16, 2020 page 5  the nominal u.s. international trade deficit widened in october. both imports and exports continued to rebound from their collapse in the first half of the year. goods imports in october rose above their january level after several months of strong growth. goods exports, however, had only recovered three-fourths of their decline since january despite brisk growth in agricultural exports. services trade remained depressed, driven by the continued suspension of most international travel. after a strong rebound in the third quarter, foreign economic growth appeared to slow sharply in recent months. the resurgence of coronavirus infections in europe and canada prompted governments to reintroduce social-distancing restrictions, leading to a fall in measures of mobility and services activity. even so, with restrictions less severe and more targeted than in the spring, the hit to economic activity looked to be more limited. economic growth appeared to hold up better in several emerging asian economies. in these economies, effective virus control was supporting domestic demand, while strong external demand boosted exports. inflationary pressures remained subdued in most foreign economies amid substantial economic slack. staff review of the financial situation financial market sentiment improved over the intermeeting period, boosted by news of forthcoming covid-19 vaccines and reduced uncertainty following the u.s. election that outweighed concerns regarding the continued rise in covid-19 cases and the potential effects of ensuing restrictions. corporate bond spreads narrowed, and major global equity price indexes rose on net. the prospect of additional fiscal stimulus likely contributed to a steeper u.s. treasury yield curve, increased inflation compensation, and broad dollar depreciation. financing conditions for businesses able to access capital markets and households possessing high credit scores remained accommodative and eased a bit further in some sectors, but conditions for borrowers dependent on bank financing remained tight. yields on 2-year nominal treasury securities were little changed since the november fomc meeting, while 10- and 30-year yields rose moderately. market participants attributed the increases in longer-term yields primarily to greater optimism about the economic outlook, due to the forthcoming availability of effective vaccines and renewed fiscal stimulus negotiations. near-dated option-implied volatility on the 10-year treasury futures contract declined to historic lows. the rise in longerterm treasury yields was concentrated in inflation com- pensation. the 5-year and 5-to-10-year measures of inflation compensation based on treasury inflation protected securities rose above their pre-pandemic levels. the expected path of the federal funds rate, based on a straight read of overnight index swap rates, remained close to the effective lower bound through mid-2023. survey-based measures indicated that market expectations regarding the federal funds rate target range did not show a tightening until 2024. broad stock price indexes increased over the intermeeting period, led by steep stock price gains in cyclical sectors and buoyed by the prospect of successful vaccines and lower post-election uncertainty. one-month s&p 500 option-implied volatility—the vix—declined, reversing a pre-election increase. consistent with the optimism driving stock prices, spreads of corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity treasury yields narrowed markedly across the credit spectrum, most notably for debt securities of the lowest credit quality firms. conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period. spreads on commercial paper (cp) and negotiable certificates of deposit across different tenors were little changed, on net, and remained around pre-pandemic levels despite continued outflows from prime money market funds (mmfs) and the coming year-end. cp issuance was robust over the intermeeting period across the different tenors. with the yields of prime mmfs approaching those of government mmfs, assets under management (aum) of prime mmfs declined moderately, while aum of government mmfs were little changed. net yields of prime and government mmfs both remained near historically low levels. the intermeeting averages of the effective federal funds rate and the secured overnight financing rate remained unchanged from the previous intermeeting period averages, at 9 basis points and 8 basis points, respectively. term and forward repo market quotes indicated muted year-end funding pressure amid ample liquidity conditions. the federal reserve maintained its pace of purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs, and federal reserve repos outstanding remained at zero over the intermeeting period. investor sentiment abroad improved over the intermeeting period, as favorable news on covid-19 vaccines and the resolution of uncertainty regarding the u.s. election apparently outweighed concerns about another surge in covid-19 cases and the resulting adoption of tighter social-distancing restrictions in many countries. page 6 federal open market committee  on balance, prices of global risky assets increased notably, implied volatility dropped sharply, and the dollar depreciated against most currencies. most advanced foreign economy sovereign yields were little changed, on net, as policymakers in several countries announced additional actions aimed at maintaining accommodative financial conditions. financing conditions in capital markets continued to be broadly accommodative, supported by low interest rates and high equity valuations. with historically low corporate bond yields, gross issuance of both investment- and speculative-grade bonds remained solid in october. much of the recent issuance was intended to refinance existing debt. gross institutional leveraged loan issuance increased substantially in october for both new loans and refinancing. seasoned equity offerings in october and november were similar to the typical volumes observed in previous years, though equity raised through initial public offerings moderated somewhat from the robust rate of issuance in september. commercial and industrial (c&i) loans outstanding on banks’ balance sheets contracted in october and november, reflecting the continued paydown of loan balances and the start of paycheck protection program loan forgiveness activity. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations continued to show signs of stabilization. although the volume of nonfinancial corporate bond downgrades outpaced upgrades somewhat in october and november, nonfinancial corporate bond defaults continued to decline. the rate of leveraged loan defaults was largely unchanged in october, albeit at somewhat elevated levels. market indicators of future default expectations for corporate bonds fell slightly but remained above their prepandemic levels. in the municipal bond market, financing conditions remained accommodative. issuance of state and local government debt moderated in november after all-time high issuance in october, and marketbased measures of state credit quality were little changed on net. financing conditions for small businesses remained tight, although some indicators suggested that they might have improved a bit. data provided by the federal reserve small business lending survey showed that standards for small businesses tightened, on net, over the third quarter, consistent with the most recent senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices. small business loan originations ticked up in october to a level near that seen in the same period last year. short-term delinquencies and defaults remained relatively elevated but significantly lower than the levels observed following the financial crisis. in light of the uncertain outlook, small business owners’ assessments of the risk of permanent closures remained elevated in most sectors, according to the census small business pulse survey. in the cre market, financing conditions remained accommodative, on net, over the intermeeting period. agency commercial mortgage-backed security (cmbs) spreads remained narrow amid strong issuance in october, while non-agency cmbs spreads ticked down. triple-b-rated non-agency cmbs spreads came down substantially from their highs in the spring, although they remained elevated relative to pre-pandemic levels. non-agency issuance picked up in october, nearing prepandemic levels. cre bank loan growth in october and november remained weak, consistent with tightened bank lending standards. in the residential mortgage market, financing conditions remained highly accommodative for borrowers accessing government-backed loans. mortgage rates remained near historic lows, supporting robust loan originations. credit continued to flow to higher-score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria while remaining tight for lower-score borrowers and for nonstandard mortgage products. the credit quality of mortgages was little changed, as the fraction of mortgages in forbearance held fairly steady, and the rate of transition into mortgage delinquency remained at pre-pandemic levels. financing conditions in consumer credit markets remained generally accommodative for borrowers with relatively strong credit. credit card balances and average credit limits on existing accounts contracted, on net, for all types of borrowers. however, auto loan balances continued to increase for higher-quality borrowers, and loan rates remained well below pre-pandemic levels. conditions in the asset-backed securities market remained stable over the intermeeting period. staff economic outlook in the u.s. economic projection prepared by the staff for the december fomc meeting, real gdp growth was revised up and the unemployment rate revised down for the fourth quarter relative to the november meeting forecast. these revisions reflected incoming data that were, on balance, better than expected, although the recent resurgence of the pandemic and increased socialdistancing restrictions in many states and localities were expected to weigh on economic activity in the coming months. as a result, the staff expected that real gdp growth would temporarily weaken in the first quarter of 2021, and the slowing seen in some of the most recent minutes of the meeting of december 15–16, 2020 page 7  high-frequency indicators of spending and employment appeared consistent with that forecast. the inflation forecast for the rest of 2020 was revised down slightly in response to incoming data, and inflation was projected to finish the year at a relatively subdued level, reflecting substantial margins of labor- and product-market slack in the economy and the large declines in consumer energy prices seen earlier in 2020. primarily in response to the recent favorable news on the development of covid-19 vaccines, the staff revised up its projection of real gdp growth for 2021 as a whole, as social-distancing measures were expected to ease more quickly than previously assumed. with monetary policy assumed to remain highly accommodative, the staff continued to project that real gdp growth over the medium term would be well above the rate of potential output growth, leading to a considerable further decline in the unemployment rate. the resulting take-up of labor- and product-market slack was expected to lead to gradually increasing inflation, and, for some time in the years beyond 2023, inflation was projected to overshoot 2 percent by a moderate amount, as monetary policy remained accommodative. the staff observed that the uncertainty related to the future course of the pandemic, the measures to control it, and the associated economic effects remained elevated. in addition, the staff continued to judge the risks to the economic outlook as being tilted to the downside. the recent sharp resurgence in the pandemic suggested that the near-term risks had risen, while the recent favorable developments regarding vaccines pointed to some reduction in the downside risks over the medium term. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2020 through 2023 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections (sep) was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. participants noted that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. economic activity and employment had continued to recover but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year. weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices had been holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. participants observed that the economy continued to show resilience in the face of the pandemic, though it was still far from having attained conditions consistent with the committee’s dual mandate. they noted that the economic recovery thus far had been stronger than anticipated—suggesting greater momentum in economic activity than had been previously thought—but viewed the more recent indicators as signaling that the pace of recovery had slowed. with the pandemic worsening across the country, the expansion was expected to slow even further in coming months. nevertheless, the positive vaccine news received over the intermeeting period was viewed as favorable for the medium-term economic outlook. participants noted that household spending on goods, especially durables, had been strong. participants commented that the rebound in consumer spending was due, in part, to fiscal programs such as federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits. these measures had provided essential support to many households. the support to incomes provided by fiscal programs, combined with reduced spending by households on some services, had contributed to a historically large increase in aggregate household savings. participants also observed that residential investment and home sales remained robust. accommodative monetary policy was viewed as having provided support to interest rate sensitive expenditure categories, including residential investment and consumer durables spending. participants regarded the positive news on vaccine development as further strengthening the medium-term outlook for household spending. however, participants saw increased challenges for the economy in the coming months, as the ongoing surge of covid-19 cases and the related mandatory and voluntary measures prompted greater social distancing and damped spending, especially on services requiring in-person contact. several page 8 federal open market committee  participants pointed out that readings on high-frequency economic indicators, such as individual mobility indexes and online restaurant reservation data, might already be registering the effects of the recent rise in virus cases. various participants noted that low-income households were particularly hard hit by the effects of the resurgent virus, and that—with the looming expiration of the expanded unemployment benefits, eviction moratoria, and loan forbearance programs—their situations could deteriorate significantly if additional relief and support did not materialize. with respect to the business sector, participants observed that business equipment investment had picked up further, with strong readings registered on new orders and shipments. a couple of participants remarked that the very low levels of inventories would likely be a factor supporting increases in production as demand continued to recover. participants noted that the economic recovery had been uneven across firms and industries. though many business contacts, particularly those in the durable goods or housing sectors, reported progress in adapting to the pandemic and improved business practices, others—especially those closely linked to the leisure, travel, and hospitality industries— were still struggling, and their problems were intensifying because of the resurgence of the virus. furthermore, while larger firms were generally seen as recovering reasonably well, conditions remained worrisome for small businesses. a number of participants noted that many small businesses were in especially vulnerable positions and that further fiscal policy support would help such businesses weather the ongoing surge in the pandemic, especially over the coming months. looking further ahead, participants observed that continuing positive developments on the vaccine front could further support business investment by helping reduce stresses in pandemic-sensitive industries and by boosting confidence. participants remarked that labor market conditions generally had continued to improve, but they were still a long way from those consistent with the committee’s maximum employment goal. although the pace of employment gains had moderated in recent months, the overall recovery in employment thus far had been faster than anticipated, with a little more than half of the 22 million jobs lost over march and april having been regained. the unemployment rate had declined further, although several participants underlined the fact that the labor force participation rate remained below its prepandemic level—likely reflecting, in part, health concerns and additional childcare responsibilities associated with online schooling. participants assessed that the ongoing surge in covid-19 infections would be particularly challenging for the labor market in coming months, but they indicated that they expected employment to continue to recover over the medium term. participants stressed that the burdens of the economic downturn had fallen unequally on different groups; in particular, high rates of job losses had been especially prevalent among lower-wage workers and among african americans and hispanics. some participants expressed the concern that the longer the pandemic continued, the more lasting damage to the labor market there could be. they noted that the number of unemployed workers who had been permanently laid off had increased notably in recent months and that those workers historically often required a longer time to find a new job than those temporarily laid off. in light of these considerations, several participants assessed that improvements in the labor market were lagging that of economic activity, and they indicated that they had not revised their projections of labor market variables to the same extent as their revision of the outlook for economic activity. in their comments about inflation, participants noted that increases in consumer prices had been soft of late, as prices of products in those categories most affected by social distancing—such as hotel accommodations and air travel—continued to be depressed and increases in rents remained low. these patterns were expected to continue in the near term as pandemic concerns intensified over the winter. however, participants generally saw these downward pressures on inflation starting to abate next year, with widespread distribution of vaccines reducing social-distancing concerns and spurring economic activity. a couple of participants suggested that, as a result of ongoing technology-enabled disruption to business models and practices or lasting pandemicinduced restraint on firms’ pricing power, downward pressure on inflation could persist. several participants noted a pickup in market-based measures of inflation compensation. participants expected that, with continued monetary policy support, inflation would rise over time. in their sep submissions, seven participants— five more than in the september sep—expected overall inflation to be above the committee’s 2 percent longerrun objective in 2023. participants noted that overall financial conditions were accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to households and businesses. however, participants underlined important differences in credit availability across borrowers. financing conditions eased further for large minutes of the meeting of december 15–16, 2020 page 9  corporations that were able to access capital markets, as equity prices rose and corporate credit spreads continued to narrow, but smaller firms and some households reliant on bank lending continued to face tight lending standards. participants noted that the financing conditions for small businesses were especially strained, with a few participants pointing out that a sizable fraction of small businesses had permanently closed or were in the process of transitioning to closure. a couple of participants observed that aggregate banking data had not indicated a significant increase in loan delinquencies for c&i loans thus far, though this development could be partly due to the cares act provisions that provided relief to many troubled borrowers or to the fact that many small businesses had gone out of business without declaring bankruptcy or defaulting on loans. some participants noted the important role played by the various section 13(3) facilities implemented in 2020 in serving as temporary backstops to key credit markets and in helping to restore and maintain the flow of credit to households, businesses, and communities. these participants also mentioned the announcement that cares act funding to support new activity in many of these facilities would not be available after december 31, and a number noted that they saw downside risks associated with this development. participants continued to see the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook as elevated, with the path of the economy highly dependent on the course of the virus. the positive vaccine news was seen as reducing downside risks over the medium term, and a number of participants saw risks to economic activity as more balanced than earlier. still, participants saw significant uncertainties regarding how quickly the deployment of vaccines would proceed as well as how different members of the public would respond to the availability of vaccines. participants cited several downside risks that could threaten the economic recovery. these risks included the possibility of significant additional fiscal policy support not materializing in a timely manner, the potential for further adverse pandemic developments— which could lead to more-stringent restrictions, moresevere business failures, and more permanent job losses—and the chance that trade negotiations between the united kingdom and the european union would not be concluded successfully before the december 31 deadline. as upside risks, participants mentioned the prospect that the release of pent-up demand, spurred by wider-scale vaccinations and easing of social distancing, could boost spending and bring individuals back to the labor force more quickly than currently expected as well as the possibility that fiscal policy developments could see measures that were larger than expected in amount or economic impact. regarding inflation, participants generally viewed the risks as having become more balanced than they were earlier in the year, though most still viewed the risks as being weighted to the downside. as an upside risk to inflation, a few participants noted the potential for a stronger-than-expected recovery, coupled with the possible emergence of pandemic-related supply constraints, to boost inflation. in their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed the federal reserve’s commitment to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term. participants noted that, with the pandemic worsening across the country, the expansion would likely slow in coming months. in contrast, for the medium term, participants commented that positive vaccine news had improved the economic outlook. that said, participants agreed that the path ahead remained highly uncertain and that the economy remained far from the committee’s longerrun goals. in light of this assessment, all participants judged that maintaining an accommodative stance of monetary policy was essential to foster economic recovery and to achieve an average inflation rate of 2 percent over time. all participants supported enhancing the committee’s guidance on asset purchases at this meeting and, in particular, adopting qualitative, outcome-based guidance indicating that increases in asset holdings would continue, with purchases of treasury securities of at least $80 billion per month and of agency mbs of at least $40 billion per month, until substantial further progress has been made toward reaching the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. in their discussions of this change, participants noted that the new guidance regarding balance sheet policy brought the statement’s references to purchases into better alignment with the committee’s outcome-based guidance on the federal funds rate, offered more clarity about the role played by the asset purchase program in providing accommodation to meet the committee’s economic goals, and underscored the responsiveness of balance sheet policy to unanticipated economic developments. a few participants stressed that all of the committee’s policy tools page 10 federal open market committee  were now well positioned to respond to the evolution of the economy. for example, if progress toward the committee’s goals proved slower than anticipated, the new guidance relayed the committee’s intention to respond by increasing monetary policy accommodation through maintaining the current level of the target range of the federal funds rate for longer and raising the expected path of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. a couple of participants remarked that, against this background, it was important to convey to the public that the federal funds rate remained the committee’s primary policy tool. a number of participants discussed considerations related to determining the eventual attainment of “substantial further progress” toward reaching the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. participants commented that this judgment would be broad, qualitative, and not based on specific numerical criteria or thresholds. various participants noted the importance of the committee clearly communicating its assessment of actual and expected progress toward its longer-run goals well in advance of the time when it could be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of purchases. regarding the decisions on the pace and composition of the committee’s asset purchases, all participants judged that it would be appropriate to continue those purchases at least at the current pace, and nearly all favored maintaining the current composition of purchases, although a couple of participants indicated that they were open to weighting purchases of treasury securities toward longer maturities. participants generally judged that the asset purchase program as structured was providing very significant policy accommodation. some participants noted that the committee could consider future adjustments to its asset purchases—such as increasing the pace of securities purchases or weighting purchases of treasury securities toward those that had longer remaining maturities—if such adjustments were deemed appropriate to support the attainment of the committee’s objectives. a few participants underlined the importance of continuing to evaluate the balance of costs and risks associated with asset purchases against the benefits arising from purchases. participants shared their views on the appropriate evolution of asset purchases once substantial further progress had been made toward the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. a number of participants noted that, once such progress had been attained, a gradual tapering of purchases could begin and the process thereafter could generally follow a sequence similar to the one implemented during the large-scale purchase program in 2013 and 2014. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. they noted that economic activity and employment had continued to recover but remained well below their levels at the beginning of the year and that weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices had been holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. members also stated that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus. in addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term and was posing considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. all members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation running persistently below this longerrun goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. members expected to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until those outcomes were achieved. all members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, members agreed that it would be appropriate for the federal reserve to continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency mbs by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress had been made toward the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. they judged that these asset purchases minutes of the meeting of december 15–16, 2020 page 11  would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective december 17, 2020, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • • • • • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) by $40 billion per month. increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. conduct term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per- the statement approved at the meeting included a drafting error. by notation vote shortly after the meeting concluded, 6 • • • counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs. allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of a statement for release. 6 the following statement was released at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. the covid-19 pandemic is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. economic activity and employment have continued to recover but remain well below their levels at the beginning of the year. weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices have been holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy will depend significantly on the course of the virus. the ongoing public health crisis will continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation in the near term, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook over the medium term. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation the committee unanimously approved a corrected version of the statement for release at 2:00 p.m. page 12 federal open market committee  averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. the committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, the federal reserve will continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. these asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, patrick harker, robert s. kaplan, neel kashkari, loretta j. mester, and randal k. quarles. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective december 17, 2020. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, january 26– 27, 2021. the meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on december 16, 2020. notation vote by notation vote completed on november 24, 2020, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on november 4–5, 2020.  james a. clouse secretary 
e january 27, 2021 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken forceful actions to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. today my colleagues on the fomc and i kept interest rates near zero and maintained our sizable asset purchases. these measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. the path of the economy continues to depend significantly on the course of the virus. a resurgence in recent months in covid-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths is causing great hardship for millions of americans and is weighing on economic activity and job creation. following a sharp rebound in economic activity last summer, the pace of the recovery has moderated in recent months, with the weakness concentrated in the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the resurgence of the virus and by greater social distancing. household spending on services remains low, especially in sectors that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. and household spending on goods has moderated following earlier large gains. in contrast, the housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, supported in part by low mortgage interest rates. business investment and manufacturing production have also picked up. the overall recovery in economic activity since last spring is due in part to federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits, which have provided essential support to many families and individuals. the recently enacted coronavirus  response and relief act [consolidated appropriations act, 2021] will provide additional support. overall economic activity remains below its level before the pandemic, and the path ahead remains highly uncertain. as with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market has slowed in recent months. employment fell by 140,000 in december, as continued gains in many industries were outweighed by significant losses in industries where the resurgence of the virus has weighed further on activity. in particular, the leisure and hospitality sector lost nearly half a million jobs, largely from restaurants and bars. the unemployment rate remained elevated at 6.7 percent in december, and participation in the labor market is notably below pre-pandemic levels. although there has been much progress in the labor market since the spring, millions of americans remain out of work. the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. in particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the service sector and for african americans and hispanics. the economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. the pandemic has also left a significant imprint on inflation. following large declines in the spring, consumer prices picked up over the summer but have leveled out more recently. for those sectors that have been most adversely affected by the pandemic, prices remain particularly soft. overall, on a 12-month basis, inflation remains below our 2 percent longer-run objective. while we should not underestimate the challenges we currently face, several developments point to an improved outlook for later this year. sufficiently widespread vaccinations would enable us to put the pandemic behind us and return to more normal economic activities. in the meantime, continued observance of social-distancing measures and wearing  masks will help us reach that goal as soon as possible. support from fiscal policy will help households and businesses weather the downturn as well as limit lasting damage to the economy that could otherwise impede the recovery. in addition, as we have seen since last summer, the economy has proved more resilient than expected, in part reflecting the adaptability of households and businesses. finally, monetary policy is playing a key role in supporting the recovery and will continue to do so. the fed’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. today we unanimously reaffirmed our statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, as we typically do each january. as we say in that statement, we view maximum employment as a “broad-based and inclusive goal.” our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. as the committee reiterated in today’s policy statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. with regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed  securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. the increase in our balance sheet since last march has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. the economy is a long way from our employment and inflation goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. our forward guidance for the federal funds rate, along with our balance sheet guidance, will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. our guidance is outcome based and ties the path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet to progress toward reaching our employment and inflation goals. thus, if progress toward our goals were to slow, the guidance would convey our intention to increase policy accommodation through a lower expected path of the federal funds rate and a higher expected path of the balance sheet. overall, our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so. we’ve also taken actions to more directly support the flow of credit in the economy, deploying our emergency lending powers to an unprecedented extent, enabled in large part by financial backing and support from congress and the treasury. although the cares act facilities are no—are no longer open to new activity, our other facilities remain in place. to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. thank you. jeanna smialek.  jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. jeanna smialek from the new york times. thank you for taking our questions. i was hoping that you would first react to the wild ride that game stock—gamestop’s stock has had this week. and then, secondarily, you and your colleagues have repeatedly made it clear that you really plan to use macroprudential tools as the first line of defense when it comes to financial stability risks. but your macroprudential tools primarily apply to the banks. i’m wondering what your plan is, if you see some sort of large financial stability risk emanating from the nonbank financial sector in the coming months, especially as it relates to search-for-yield kind of activities. you know, what, what do you see as the solution there? thanks. chair powell. so, on, on your first question, i don’t want to comment on a particular company or, or day’s market activity or things like that. it’s just not really something that i would typically comment on. in terms of macroprudential policy tools, so, as you know, no doubt, we rely on sort of always-on, through-the-cycle macroprudential policy tools, particularly the stress tests and also the elevated levels of liquidity and capital and, and, and also resolution planning that we—that we impose on the largest financial institutions. we don’t use time-varying tests and tools as some other countries do. and we think it’s a good approach because—for us to use ones that are always-on—because we don’t really think we’d be successful in every case in picking the exact right time to intervene in markets. so that’s for banks. you really asked about nonbanks, the nonbank sector. and so we monitor financial conditions very broadly. and while we don’t have jurisdiction over, over many areas in the nonbank sector, other agencies do. and so we do coordinate through the financial stability oversight council and with other agencies who have responsibility for, for nonbank supervision.  and, in fact, as you know, in the last crisis, the banking system held up fairly well so far. and, and the dislocations that we saw from the outsized economic and financial shock of the pandemic really appeared in the nonbank sector. so that’s—right now we are engaged in, in carefully examining, understanding, and thinking about what, what in the nonbank sector will need to be addressed in the next year or so. michelle smith. thank you. james politi, ft. james politi. thank you so much, michelle and chair powell. i had a question on fiscal policy. last year you consistently said that the economy needed more fiscal support and, i believe, were pleased when the $900 billion package was approved in december. we have— now have a new, new president, a new congress. we have a weakening short-term outlook. do you believe the economy still needs additional support on the fiscal side? and in what areas? chair powell. thank you. so i guess i’d start by saying that the, the fiscal response that we’ve seen to this downturn has been strong, and i think we can say now that it’s been sustained after the passage of the—of the, the most recent act in, in late december. and that’s really a key reason why the recovery has been as strong as it’s been. fiscal policy has been absolutely essential. when we look back on, on the history of this period, we’ll see a strong and sustained fiscal policy response. i would—i would add that we’re, as i mentioned, a long way from a full recovery. something like 9 million people remain unemployed as a consequence of the pandemic. that’s as many people as lost their jobs at the peak of the global financial crisis and the great recession. many small businesses are under pressure, and there are other needs to be addressed. and the path ahead is still pretty uncertain.  so, all of that said, the judgment on how much to spend and in what way is really one for congress and the administration and not for the fed. and these discussions are going on right now. so there’s a discussion, as you know, right now around, around those precise questions, and, and that’s appropriate, but not for us to play a role in talking about specific policies. michelle smith. thank you. steve liesman. steve liesman. thank you, mr. chairman. i wonder if i could follow up on jeanna’s question here. i understand that you do address issues of, of valuations through macroprudential policies in the first instance, but there’s a range of assets. and i know you do watch a range of assets. but from bitcoin to corporate bonds to the stock market in general to some of these more specific meteoric rises in stocks like gamestop, how do you address the concern that super easy monetary policy—asset purchases and zero interest rates—are potentially fueling a bubble that could cause economic fallout should it burst? chair powell. let me—let me provide a little context. the shock that the—from the pandemic was unprecedented both in its nature and in its size and in the amount of unemployment that it created and in the shock to economic activity. there’s nothing close to it in our modern economic history. so our response was really to that. and we—we’ve done what we could, first, to restore market function and to provide a bit of relief, then to support the recovery. and, hopefully, we’ll be able to do the third thing, which is to avoid longer-run damage to the—to the economy. our role assigned by congress is maximum employment and stable prices and also look after financial stability. so, in a world where, almost a year later, we’re, we’re still 9 million jobs, at least—that’s one way of counting it; it can actually be counted much higher than that— short of maximum employment and people are out of the labor force who were in the labor  force—the real unemployment rate is close to 10 percent if you include people that’ve left the labor force—it’s very much appropriate that monetary policy be highly accommodative to support maximum employment and price stability, which is getting inflation back to 2 percent and averaging 2 percent over time. so, on, on matters of financial stability, we have a framework. we don’t look at one thing or two things. we look at—and we made that framework public after the financial crisis so that it could be criticized and understood and we could be held accountable. and, you know, the things that we look at are—we do look at asset prices. we also look at leverage in the banking system. we look at leverage in the non—the nonbanking system, which is to say, corporates and households. and we look at also funding risk. and if you look at it across that range of, of, of readings, they’re each different, but we monitor them carefully. and i would say that financial stability vulnerabilities overall are moderate. our overall goal is to assure that the financial system itself is resilient to, to shocks of all kinds, that it’s strong and resilient. and that includes not just the banks, but money market funds and, and all different kinds of nonbank financial structures as well. so when we get to the nonfinancial sector, we don’t—we don’t have jurisdiction over that. but—so i would just say that our—that there are many things that go in, as you know, to, to setting asset prices. so if you look at what’s really been driving asset prices, really, in the last couple of months, it isn’t monetary policy. it’s been expectations about vaccines. and it’s also financial—sorry, fiscal policy. those are—those are the news items that have been driving, driving asset purchases—sorry, asset values in, in recent months. so i, i know that monetary policy does play a role there, but that’s how we look at it. and i think, you know, i think that the connection between low interest rates and, and asset  values is probably something that’s not as tight as people think, because a lot of—a lot of different factors are driving asset prices at any given time. steve liesman. can i follow up, michelle, if you don’t mind? mr. chairman, do you rule out or see as one of your tools in the toolkit the idea of adjusting monetary policy to address asset values? chair powell. so, you know, that’s—as you know, that’s one of the very difficult questions in all of monetary policy. and we don’t rule it out as a theoretical matter, but we, we clearly look to macroprudential tools, regulatory tools, supervisory tools, other kinds of tools rather than monetary policy in, in addressing financial stability issues. it’s not—you know, the, the monetary policy we know strengthens economic activity and job creation through fairly well- understood channels. and a strong economy is actually a great supporter of financial stability. that will mean strong, you know, well-capitalized institutions, and, and households will be— will be working. and, and so we know that. we don’t actually understand the tradeoff between—the sense of it is, would you—if you raise interest rates and thereby tighten financial conditions and reduce economic activity now in order to address asset bubbles and things like that, what—will that even help? will it—will it actually cause more damage, or will it help? so i think that’s unresolved. and i, i think it’s, it’s something we, we look at as not, not theoretically ruled out but not something we, we—we’ve ever done and not something we would plan to do. we would rely on macroprudential and other tools to deal with financial stability issues. steve liesman. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. michael derby.  michael derby. yes. thank you very much. i wanted to ask you, if there is a near- term rise in inflation related to the recovery, how will you determine whether or not it’s something that’s temporary or more enduring? and how much inflation is the fed willing to tolerate before it acts to restrain price pressures? chair powell. so, on inflation, a couple of things—there are a couple of things that are worth mentioning. one is just that we know that we measure inflation on a trailing 12-month basis. and as we—as we lap the very low inflation readings of march and april of last year, we’ll see measured 12-month inflation move up a few tenths. this is just—they’re called base effects, and, and that’s a—that’s a transient thing that we think will pass. there’s also the possibility—indeed, it’s in some forecasts—that as the economy fully reopens, there’ll be a burst of spending, and—because people will be enthusiastic that the pandemic is over, potentially, and that that could also create some upward pressure on inflation. now, again, we would see that as something likely to be transient and not to be very large. in both cases, we don’t see those as either lasting or particularly large. so the way we would react is, we’re going to be patient. expect us to wait and see and not react if we see small and what we would review—we would view as very likely to be transient effects on inflation. i think if you—you know, it helps to look back at, at the inflation dynamics that the united states has had now for some decades and notice that there has been, you know, significant disinflationary pressure for some time, for a couple of decades. inflation has averaged less than 2 percent for a quarter of a century. and the inflation dynamics, with the flat phillips curve and low persistence of inflation, is very much intact. those things, they change over time. we understand that inflation dynamics evolve constantly over time, but they don’t  change rapidly. so we think it’s very unlikely that anything we see now would result in, you know, troubling inflation. of course, if we did get sustained inflation at a level that was uncomfortable, we have tools for that. it’s far harder to deal with, with too low inflation. we know what to do with higher inflation, which is, you know, should the need arise, we, we would have those tools. and we don’t expect to see that at all. in terms of how much, you know, what we’ve said is we’d like to see—because inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, we’d like to see it run moderately above 2 percent for some time. we have not adopted a formula. we’re not going to adopt a formula. we’re going to—we, we use policy rules and formulas in everything we do, consult them constantly, but we don’t set policy by them. we don’t do that. and so we’re going to preserve an element of judgment. and, again, we’ll seek inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. and we’ll, we’ll show what that means when we get inflation above 2 percent. the, the way to achieve credibility on that is to actually do it. and so that’s what we’re planning on doing. michelle smith. thank you. rachel siegel. rachel siegel. thank you, michelle, and thank you, chair powell, for taking our questions. i have a two-pronged question about vaccines. so you specifically mentioned progress in the rollout of vaccines, but there is still plenty that we don’t know about supply over the coming weeks and months. so i’m curious how you and your colleagues are factoring in vaccine rollouts and funding for distribution in your forecasts and what that timeline looks like. and then, secondly, i’m wondering if you, yourself haven’t—has been—have been vaccinated, along with other fomc members. thank you.  chair powell. so, in terms of the rollout of the vaccines, we see what everyone else sees, right? we see that we’re, we’re vaccinating people and at a rate of about a million a day, apparently, and that it’ll take quite a while to get—to get to the numbers that the experts say are required to get to herd immunity. and we think it’s going to be a struggle. you’ll notice that we, we said that the, the pandemic still, still provides considerable downside risks to the economy. and that’s one of the reasons why, is that—is the slowness of the rollout. the other—another reason why is just the arrival of these new virus strains. we don’t know how to—we don’t know how to model that. you know, we can have a base case, but we realize no one knows how the—how this new vaccine will roll out, how successful it will be, how high we’ll be able to drive vaccination, and those sorts of things. so we have a base case, and we—but we always—we always look at, at the range of possibilities. in this case, we particularly look at the downside risks. you know, that’s really what we do is, we, we set policies so that we’re, we’re, you know, we’re going to remain accommodative until we actually see improvement in the economy and not just in the outlook, in the data. so that’s, that’s how we think about, about that. and i would—i would also add, there’s nothing more important to the economy now than, than people getting vaccinated. you know, if you—if you, you think about the places where the economy is weak—i mentioned bars and restaurants. that’s 400,000 jobs we lost last month, and that’s all because of the spread of the pandemic. many other areas of the economy— actually, there was actually job creation in—you know, in goods production and in some service parts—industries as well. but we’re just not going to be able to get that last group of people back to work—and it’s a big group of people—until we get the pandemic behind us.  we, we have not won this yet. we haven’t succeeded in doing this yet, and we need to stay focused on it as a country and, and get there. and, you know, we clearly can, but we’re going to have to stay focused. and that includes—you know, that includes us at the fed, monetary policy. i, i have been vaccinated once, and i expect to get my second vaccine sometime soon. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. michael mckee. michael mckee. a question—i have a question that i was going to ask, but i need to follow up for a second on the questions about the markets and macroprudential, and that is, you have one tool you can use. would you be discussing—have you discussed raising margin requirements under regulation t? and, if not, why not? chair powell. no, we haven’t—we haven’t done that. i mean, remember, we’re, we’re focused on maximum employment, price stability, financial stability as i defined it—the broad financial sector. and, and that—that’s not, you know—over the years, we, we consult the fact that we have that authority. but, no, it’s not something we’re looking at right now at all. michael mckee. all right. my follow-up question is, a lot of people in the markets think that you’re basically stuck right now, because you can’t really go lower with the zero bound, rejecting negative interest rates, and you can’t really go higher because of the threat of a taper tantrum. is the fed locked into a very narrow corridor now? and, if not, you did say you would signal any change in interest rates a long time ahead. but [former] new york fed president bill dudley says there’s no way you can avoid a taper tantrum. so how do you do that?  chair powell. well, first, i—we, we think our policy stance is, is just right. we think it’s providing significant support for economic activity and hiring. we, you know, we, we adopted a new monetary policy framework of flexible average inflation targeting in august. in september, we, we implemented rate guidance that, that was consistent with and based on that new framework. in december, we did the same for asset purchases. so we now have, you know, strong guidance on, on rates and on asset purchases that’s providing very strong support for economic activity. if you look at the sectors of the economy that are interest sensitive, you will see very strong activity: housing, durable goods, automobile sales. so, you know, our, our policies are working. and we think that, that they are—we think our policy stance is, is right. that said, there’s clearly more that we can do. with asset purchases, for example, we can, you know—that’s, that’s a tool we can do more—we can strengthen our guidance, too, if we were to think that that were appropriate. what you see is an economy where what’s holding it back is not the lack of, of policy support from the fed. it’s the pandemic. it’s, it’s the spread of the disease and people’s reluctance or, or inability to partake in certain kinds of economic activities, which amount to a, a meaningful part of the economy. so that’s, that’s what i would say. we certainly have things that we can do, but we think we’re—we think we’re in the right place. you know, in terms of—in terms of tapering, it’s just premature. we just created the, the guidance. we said we’d want to see substantial further progress toward our goals before we modify our, our asset purchase guidance. it’s just too early to be talking about dates, which we should be focused on, on progress. we’ll need to see actual progress. and when, when we see ourselves getting to that point, we’ll communicate clearly about it to, to the public so nobody  will be surprised when the time comes. and we’ll do that well in advance of actually considering what will be a pretty gradual taper. michael mckee. well, if i might, you—your policies are working, and you can maybe do more. but the question is, can you stop doing it when it’s time? chair powell. yes. so, you know, i, i was here—we had all the same questions back in—after the global financial crisis. we raised interest rates. we froze the balance sheet size, and then we shrank the balance sheet size. so there’s no reason why we, we won’t be able to do that again. in fact, we learned a lot from that experience. and, you know, we, we understand—as we understood then, but even more so—we understand that the—that the way to do it is to communicate well in advance, to, to do predictable things, and to move gradually. and that’s, that’s what we’re going to do. we’re going to be very transparent. but, honestly, no—you know, the whole focus on exit is premature, if i may say. we’re focused on finishing the job we’re doing, which is to support the economy, to give the economy the support it needs. there are people out there who’ve lost their jobs. it’s essential that we get them back to work as quickly as possible, and we want to do everything we can to do that. and that is our primary focus right now. it’s, it’s, it’s too soon to be—to be worried about that. you know, when we come to exit, we have a—we have an understanding of how to do that, and we’ll do it very carefully. but in the meantime, our focus is on giving the economy the support it needs. michelle smith. thank you. victoria guida. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. i just wanted to go back to fiscal stimulus for a second. you know, we just had a $900 billion package, and now congress is talking about doing  more. do you expect more aid directly to consumers to be inflationary? and, specifically, how worried should lawmakers be about, you know, causing concerning levels of inflation? chair powell. i, i would say that, again, we have been struggling with disinflationary forces for some time. if you look around the world—look in western europe, look at japan—around the world, large economies have, have felt much more downward pressure on inflation, have fallen short of their inflation goals, for some time now. that is the broad global macroeconomic context that we all live in. and we believe that those global forces—which are, you know, aging demographics, advancing technology, and globalization—those, those forces are still in effect. now, they may slow down, and, and it’s, it’s an interesting question, the extent to which, for example, globalization may slow down or even reverse. notwithstanding that, inflation dynamics in the united states have, have consisted of a flat phillips curve and low persistence for, for a long time. we do not expect in the near term that that will change significantly. it may evolve over time, but significant time. you know, these things are—these things are, are changing, but they don’t change at a rapid rate. and there’s—i, i don’t believe that, that they will. so i wouldn’t—i’m, i’m not—i’m much more worried about falling short of a complete recovery and losing people’s careers and lives that they—that they built because they don’t get to work—back to work in time and things like that. i’m more concerned about that and the damage that will do not just to their lives, but to the united states economy, to the productive capacity of the economy. i’m more concerned about that than about the possibility, which exists, of higher inflation. frankly, we welcome slightly higher inflation, somewhat higher inflation. the kind of troubling inflation that people like me grew up with seems, seems far away and unlikely in, in the both domestic and global context that we’ve been in for some time.  michelle smith. thank you. steve matthews, bloomberg. steve matthews. chair powell, treasury secretary yellen, in a memo to her employees yesterday, spoke of the close working relationship with the federal reserve. and i’m wondering how you would describe the relationship with, with treasury under chair yellen, if you’ve met with, with, with treasury secretary yellen and, and/or president biden since he has taken office. and, you know, secondly, about that, as you know, in the last four years, there was constant criticism from the—of the fed from the president and from other officials of the administration. do you have any kind of assurance or expectation that this will now be more of a hands-off attitude, in terms of commenting on monetary policy from the administration? chair powell. okay. so i have the highest respect and admiration for secretary yellen. and i’m, i’m sure that we’re going to have a, a good working relationship together. absolutely sure. we’ll also have a good institutional relationship between the fed and the treasury. and i expect that that’ll be very good and, and very productive. it’ll be collaborative. we’ll work together. now, the way that works is, is that, you know, we know—the agencies know each other well, and this is true of finance ministries and central banks around the world. we know to stay in our lanes. we know we have different authorities. we know that we work together on some things to—you know, for the benefit of the public. and i’m, i’m absolutely sure that we’re going to do that. i, you know, haven’t—i haven’t spoken to, to secretary yellen—i’m going to be calling her “chair yellen” most of the time, so you just have to be patient with me—secretary yellen. i haven’t spoken to her since i congratulated her on being nominated. i do expect very soon to  begin our regular calls or—and, and ultimately meetings, which have gone on, really, for, you know, 70 years. the treasury secretary and the, and the fed chair have had weekly or so meetings, lunches, breakfast, calls, depending on the situation. so i expect that will—that will happen soon. i’ve—i have not met the, the president, president biden. and just, you know, i, i, i don’t—i don’t have any comment on your—on your last question. i wouldn’t want to comment one way or the other. steve matthews. just to follow up briefly, you have some 13(3) emergency programs that will expire march 31 that the fed and the treasury have worked on together. do you have an expectation of whether those will be left, left to expire then or whether they will be extended? chair powell. so i—i’ll just say that i think our facilities were very successful in supporting the economy during its darkest moments and i believe saved—protected the loss of millions of jobs. we’re going to continue to monitor financial and credit conditions throughout the economy. and, and if the kind of emergency conditions arise that are required under that law, then our emergency lending tools will remain available. now, i’ve had no discussions with anybody at treasury on that, because i haven’t had any discussions with anybody at treasury other than meet—you know, high-level meetings with the—with the transition team a month or so ago. and once we start having those, those meetings, of course, i’ll observe, you know, the long-standing practice of not talking about confidential discussions. but as of now, there haven’t been any discussions at all. michelle smith. thank you. howard schneider, reuters.  howard schneider. thanks, chair powell, for doing this. so a couple questions on timing. in the statement, you removed—regarding the coronavirus—you removed the time reference “short and medium term” when it comes to the risks to the economic outlook, and it simply now says “considerable risks to the economic outlook.” should we read that as a sort of a positive change that you, you now see an end—sort of the endgame of this down the road? or is it more that you’re, you’re worried it could last longer than you expect? and a related issue, have you given any guidance yet to the fed staff or system on when the fed itself might resume in-person events? chair powell. yes. so in the statement, on the language, we dropped “in the medium term,” because, really, the risks are, are in the near term, frankly. you know, as i mentioned, it’s the rollout of the vaccine. it’s the arrival of new strains that, that are more contagious and perhaps more virulent. and those are the—those are the—and also just the ongoing—third thing, of course, is the ongoing spread of the virus. it’s, it’s in the near term. it’s not in the medium term. we were thinking—when we were thinking “medium term,” we were thinking of longer-term scarring and things like that. nonetheless, i mean, i think what—to go to your, your second question, and as i mentioned in my, in my opening remarks—there is good evidence to, to support a stronger economy in the second half of this year. in fact, if you look at, at—as we do—look at a range of private forecasters, what was their forecast in, in december, and what’s their forecast now? right across the board: much higher forecasts for 2021 growth. and that’s because of the ongoing rollout of the vaccines and also because of fiscal policy, expectations, and the reality of, of the crra act [consolidated appropriations act, 2021] getting done. so there is—there is a positive case there.  but that—think of that as—the sort of base case is, is a strong economy in the second half of the year. the language says that there’s still—i forget the exact language—downside risks. we used an adjective. it was “considerable”—“considerable risks to the economic outlook.” so there are considerable risks, risks to the economic outlook. nonetheless, that is—that is a more positive outlook. and that’s really how, how i would—i would parse that for you. i don’t know when we’re going to come back to work, and i’m, i’m actually in the eccles building here today. and i don’t know when that’ll be. i mean, we—i can’t wait to be working in person again. but, you know, we—we’ve been able to work successfully remotely. we really have. and, you know, we’re not going to push people when they’re uncomfortable. we’re going to wait till people are comfortable and wait till it’s well and truly time to get back together in person. howard schneider. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. hannah lang. hannah lang. hi, chair powell. thank you so much for taking our questions. the fed in december eased its restrictions on bank dividend payments and share repurchases. and so i wanted to ask what factors the fed will be looking at to determine what level banks can pay out in the second quarter and when we can expect such a decision. chair powell. okay. so we’re, we’re monitoring that on an ongoing basis, continue to—continuing to evaluate our, our restrictions. and we haven’t made a decision about whether to continue them in the second quarter or not. we’re just going to look at bank—we’re going to look at the whole range of, of information, including economic activity, banking activity, the, the success in vaccination. all of those things will go into our assessment of what the right answer is to that question.  i think we’ve been careful about, about rolling back those restrictions. and, and i’m pleased with where we are. let’s remember that the banks—that the banks that are subject to the stress tests have taken very, very large reserves—very large loss reserves, and also increased their capital. they’ve actually had—they have higher capital ratios now than they had at the beginning of the pandemic. so the banking system has held up well here. and, and—but, you know, we’re going to be careful about this and, you know, move based on data, and all of the data, when we make that decision. michelle smith. thank you. edward lawrence. edward lawrence. mr. chairman, thank you for taking the question. so i’m interested in the housing sector. home prices are rising, 9 percent in some areas, because of low interest rates. are you concerned about a bubble forming there yet? and is there a price increase, you know, that you’re looking at where it might change the level of mortgage-backed securities the fed is buying? and, as a continuation of that, is the bubble in the corporate debt cycle more concerning for you? chair powell. so, on housing, you know, housing is now—the level of housing activity is at its highest level since before the global financial crisis, in some measures. so we’ve had a very strong rebound in housing. some of the, the tightness in housing markets, we think—which has led to the, the significant price increases this year—we think is, is a passing phenomenon. there was a lot of pent-up demand. there’s a one-time thing happening with people who are spending all of their time in their house, and they’re thinking either “i need a bigger house” or “i need another house and a different house—or a second house,” in some cases. so there’s just—there’s a—there’s a one- time shift in demand that we think will get satisfied—also, that will call forth supply. and that  will—that will, we think—we think that those price increases are unlikely to be sustained for, for all of those reasons. so you asked about corporate debt, i guess? edward lawrence. yes. i’m just concerned if that’s a bubble that you’re watching. chair powell. so we, we monitor pretty much all of the big financial markets pretty carefully. and, you know, what’s happened in, in the corporate debt market, beginning with the announcement of our corporate credit facility, has been, you’ve seen lenders lending and borrowers borrowing. you’ve seen relatively significantly fewer defaults than we—than we expected. there were a lot of downgrades and some defaults at the beginning, and those have really slowed down. and, by the way, the same is true for bank loans. banks are not experiencing the kinds of defaults that, that we all were concerned about in the early months of the pandemic. it’s just not materializing. so they’re having to reverse some of their loss reserves, actually. debts—corporate debt spreads are, are tight. they’ve tightened. they were very broad—high—wide, of course, at the—during the acute phase of the pandemic, and they’ve— you know, they’re now at the lower end of their typical range. and we do monitor that. you know, it’s, it’s not something we can control or operate on directly, but we do—we do watch those things. and, you know, in a sense, it’s good that companies have been able to finance themselves during this period, because they—they’ve been able to stay in business. they’ve been able to keep their employees working. and, you know, that’s a good thing. and that’s, that’s part of highly accommodative financial conditions. michelle smith. thanks. chris rugaber.  christopher rugaber. thanks. can you—since you suggested that the concern from the pandemic is perhaps a shorter-term concern and that’s why you removed some of the language from the statement, can you talk about what kind of impact you’re seeing so far? do you feel that structural impacts have been—how would you characterize those? i know that’s been a major concern—you’ve talked about at this press conference and others. do we see longer-term damage to the job market? have—or has there been some success in preventing that? and, compared to previous recessions, how would you characterize the damage to the job market here, in terms of things like, you know, permanent job loss, workers that need to shift industries, that kind of thing? chair powell. you know, the, the, the big thing is that the jury’s out. and this has been a concern since the very beginning, is the concern that people—if, if they become disconnected from the industry or the job where—that they used to work in, it, it can be years or never when they get back into the labor force, particularly for people who are well along in their careers—the same kind of scarring for small businesses, which don’t have the kind of resources that you need to get through this. so we’ve, we’ve had a big concern about, about both of those. we haven’t seen as much of it as we—as we feared. and that’s a good thing. but as i said that, you know, the jury is out here—9 or 10 million people still out of work because of the pandemic. they’re—a big chunk of them are people who worked in public-facing jobs in the service sector. and, you know, they’ve gotten a lot of support from fiscal policy and some from monetary policy. but the question is getting them back to work. and, you know, it’s, it’s harder if you’re—it takes longer, empirically, to find that next job if you’re looking at a brand-new industry. it’s not easy to change careers completely midcareer. so that just, again, stresses the  urgency that we feel and others feel at, at, you know, fully defeating the pandemic, finishing the job and getting back to a place where it’s safe to have these—you know, to, to, to stay in hotels, to fly on airplanes, to go to sporting events and movie theaters, and all of those things. so those people are still at risk. and we’re, we’re very, very focused on that group of people with our policy and, and, and, you know, the way we look at the economy. so many people have had that bridge across the pandemic. you know, we talked about that at the beginning. for many people, it’s clear that they’ve made it across, and their job is okay, and their house is okay. and, you know, it’s been terribly inconvenient and painful, and schools are closed and things like that. but there, there’s a bunch of people yet who haven’t found that bridge yet. and we’re, we’re very focused on that. of course, the other thing is, we’re going to a different economy. and we’re going to be learning more about that as we go. but, clearly, we’re, we’re learning that things can be done from remote locations. we’re learning that technology can replace people even more than we thought. and some of that is happening. so i think as we, you know, as we get into this, you know, the phase after—even after the economy fully reopens, i think we’re still going to need to keep people in mind whose lives have been disrupted, because they’ve lost that—the work that they did. and i think it would be wise as a country, for the longer-run productive capacity of the country, if we were to look out for those people and help them find their way back into the labor force even if it means continuing support for an additional period of time. christopher rugaber. great. if i could ask this quick follow—yesterday susan rice, domestic policy advisor at the white house, talked about a citigroup study that said closing racial economic gaps could add up to $5 trillion to the u.s. economy over the next five  years and 6 million new jobs. do you agree that racial disparities are currently a drag on the economy? and, if so, what can the fed do proactively to narrow those racial gaps in income and wealth, including potentially through regulatory policy? chair powell. i strongly agree with that, as a matter of fact. i think if you look at either—look at employment gaps or unemployment gaps or wage gaps, wealth gaps, homeowning gaps, all of those persistent gaps that exist even controlling for many other factors, you will see that they’re, they’re persistent, they’re—and they’re very difficult to explain. and so it’s—the reason we talk about inequality and, and racial inequality in particular, is that it goes to our job, which is to achieve maximum employment, which, which links up with, with—we want—we want the potential output of the united states to be as high as it can possibly be. we want—we want an economy where everybody can take part and everybody, everybody can put their labor in, and they can share in the prosperity of our great economy. that’s what we want. and that’s how the u.s. economy can be bigger, stronger, growing faster, is if we can achieve a more—a broader prosperity. so, now, in terms of our tools, you know, of course, that project that i just mentioned is one for the broader society, for the private sector, for fiscal policy, but we have a role to play. and, and that is, how we think about the labor market. principally, when we say that the maximum employment is a, a broad and inclusive goal, what we’re—what we’re saying there is, we’re not just going to look at the headline—and we never did, really, but—we’re not going to just look at the headline numbers. we’re going to look at different demographic groups, including women, minorities, and others. and we’re not going to say that we’ve reached maximum employment, which is our statutory goal, until we’ve reached maximum employment.  and you haven’t if, if there’s lots of pockets of, of people not participating in or not employed in the labor market. so those are the things that we can do. we also do a tremendous amount of research on these issues. you know, we do—we, we have such a focus on these issues now that we actually—we, we have a new, a webpage, relatively new, where you can access all of it. but it’s a lot of activities in our division of consumer and community affairs. it’s lots of research, and, and it’s also, you know, our enforcement of the fair lending laws and things like that. so i think everybody’s got a role to play here. it’s a—it’s a national goal and a national job, and we’re just going to do our part of the job. and it’s something we’re strongly committed to. michelle smith. thank you. for the last question, we’ll go to scott horsley at npr. scott horsley. thanks, mr. chairman. you said in your opening remarks that the, the economy in many ways had proven more resilient than, than people expected, and that that reflected the adaptability of both households and businesses. are, are there adaptations that caught you by surprise, maybe related to remote work or new ways to do on-site work, in-person, face-to-face work that, that the economy’s proven tougher than, than you expected at the outset of this pandemic? chair powell. well, yes. so i think, if you go back to the—to the beginning, there was a real concern. i mean, just, just take the financial markets, for example. suddenly, all of those big buildings all over the, the—new york city and all around the world where people work in the financial markets with terminals and everything, everybody had to go home, and they had to take their terminals with them. and i think there was a real concern that there would be a tremendous loss of functionality just at the time when the financial markets were under  historically difficult conditions. and yet, it worked out okay. so i think people—many people in the financial sector are still working with their terminals at home, including people on trading floors or on virtual trading floors. now, some of that’s reversing now. but we have definitely learned that we can do more work from home in many, many different lines of work. of course, that’s not possible if your job involves being at a place, doing personal services. for many people, it’s not possible. and that’s very much something that skews to higher-income, higher-educated people being able to work from home and others not so much. so i think we’ve learned that. the other thing, though, even conditional on that, when we saw the wave in the south and the west, the wave of cases this summer, i think, intuitively, having seen what happened in march and april, we expected there to be a significant hit to economic activity. and people kind of just got on with their lives and went and, and dealt with it. and, and it didn’t actually—it had a much smaller effect on economic activity than we expected. then comes the fall wave, which is just so much larger—a very, very large wave as, as was very much forecast. people going indoors, the cold weather, all of that. and even there, if you look at—i would say, look at the december jobs report. so, big job losses in, you know, in that part of the service sector. so i mentioned 400,000 jobs in bars and restaurants. there’s another 100,000 in similar kinds of activities. but if you go—if you look elsewhere, it’s not having an effect. you know, even purchasing manager index and sentiment indexes on, on areas of the economy that are not directly—really directly—exposed to the pandemic in their economic activity, they’re doing okay. they are. housing is a great example. you know, the way—the way—the way the housing industry worked, that when you buy a house, there was a lot of in-person contact. they managed  to pretty much immediately go to a more virtual—you know, with all the technology. they were able to completely avoid that. and the housing market has been really strong, notwithstanding that it’s, it’s now quite virtual rather than in person. so there’s been a lot of adapting, and—but you can’t adapt, you know, hotels, sporting venues, movie theaters, restaurants, bars. you just—you know, those are just going to—and that’s—again, that’s millions and millions of people. and so you’re just going to have to defeat the pandemic, which, as i mentioned, you know, we, we have a plan to do that, but we haven’t done it yet. and we need to—we need to finish the job. and we—it’s, it’s within our power to do that as a country this year. and i would just urge that—and i know people are working hard on that. but that, that is really the main thing about the economy, is, is getting the pandemic under control, getting everyone vaccinated, getting people wearing masks, and all that. that’s the single most important economic growth policy that we can have. thank you.   NA
NA annual organizational matters 3 the agenda for this meeting reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate members of the federal open market committee for a term beginning january 26, 2021, were received and that these individuals executed their oaths of office. the elected members and alternate members were as follows: john c. williams, president of the federal reserve bank of new york, with helen e. mucciolo, first vice president of the federal reserve bank of new york, as alternate thomas i. barkin, president of the federal reserve bank of richmond, with eric rosengren, president of the federal reserve bank of boston, as alternate charles l. evans, president of the federal reserve bank of chicago, with loretta j. mester, president of the federal reserve bank of cleveland, as alternate raphael w. bostic, president of the federal reserve bank of atlanta, with james bullard, president of the federal reserve bank of st. louis, as alternate mary c. daly, president of the federal reserve bank of san francisco, with esther l. george, president of the federal reserve bank of kansas city, as alternate by unanimous vote, the following officers of the committee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the committee in 2022: jerome h. powell john c. williams james a. clouse matthew m. luecke michelle a. smith mark e. van der weide michael held richard m. ashton trevor reeve stacey tevlin beth anne wilson chair vice chair secretary deputy secretary assistant secretary general counsel deputy general counsel assistant general counsel economist economist economist  minutes of the meeting of january 26–27, 2021 page 3 shaghil ahmed david altig kartik b. athreya brian m. doyle rochelle m. edge eric m. engen beverly hirtle sylvain leduc anna paulson william wascher associate economists by unanimous vote, the committee selected the federal reserve bank of new york to execute transactions for the system open market account (soma). by unanimous vote, the committee selected lorie k. logan and patricia zobel to serve at the pleasure of the committee as manager and deputy manager of the soma, respectively, on the understanding that these selections were subject to being satisfactory to the federal reserve bank of new york. secretary’s note: the federal reserve bank of new york subsequently sent advice that the manager and deputy manager selections indicated previously were satisfactory. by unanimous vote, the committee voted to reaffirm without revision the authorization for domestic open market operations, the authorization for foreign currency operations, and the foreign currency directive, as shown below. the guidelines for the conduct of system open market operations in federal-agency issues remained suspended. authorization for domestic open market operations (as reaffirmed effective january 26, 2021) states, that are eligible for purchase or sale under section 14(b) of the federal reserve act (“eligible securities”) for the system open market account (“soma”): i. as an outright operation with securities dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained at the selected bank: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis (including such transactions as are commonly referred to as dollar rolls and coupon swaps) at market prices; or ii. as a temporary operation: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis, to purchase such eligible securities subject to an agreement to resell (“repo transactions”) or to sell such eligible securities subject to an agreement to repurchase (“reverse repo transactions”) for a term of 65 business days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise authorized by the committee, are determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual counterparties; b. to allow eligible securities in the soma to mature without replacement; c. to exchange, at market prices, in connection with a treasury auction, maturing eligible securities in the soma with the treasury, in the case of eligible securities that are direct obligations of the united states or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the united states; and d. to exchange, at market prices, maturing eligible securities in the soma with an agency of the united states, in the case of eligible securities that are direct obligations of that agency or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by that agency. open market transactions securities lending 1. the federal open market committee (the “committee”) authorizes and directs the federal reserve bank selected by the committee to execute open market transactions (the “selected bank”), to the extent necessary to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted by the committee: a. to buy or sell in the open market securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, the united states, and securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the united 2. in order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, the committee authorizes the selected bank to operate a program to lend eligible securities held in the soma to dealers on an overnight basis (except that the selected bank may lend eligible securities for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions). a. such securities lending must be: i. at rates determined by competitive bidding; ii. at a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives of the program;  page 4 federal open market committee iii. subject to reasonable limitations on the total amount of a specific issue of eligible securities that may be auctioned; and iv. subject to reasonable limitations on the amount of eligible securities that each borrower may borrow. b. the selected bank may: i. reject bids that, as determined in its sole discretion, could facilitate a bidder’s ability to control a single issue; ii. accept treasury securities or cash as collateral for any loan of securities authorized in this paragraph 2; and iii. accept agency securities as collateral only for a loan of agency securities authorized in this paragraph 2. operational readiness testing 3. the committee authorizes the selected bank to undertake transactions of the type described in paragraphs 1 and 2 from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness, subject to the following limitations: a. all transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 shall be conducted with prior notice to the committee; b. the aggregate par value of the transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 that are of the type described in paragraph 1.a.i, 1.b, 1.c and 1.d shall not exceed $5 billion per calendar year; and c. the outstanding amount of the transactions described in paragraphs 1.a.ii and 2 shall not exceed $5 billion at any given time. transactions with customer accounts 4. in order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments or other authorized services for foreign central bank and international accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank (the “foreign accounts”) and accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank as fiscal agent of the united states pursuant to section 15 of the federal reserve act (together with the foreign accounts, the “customer accounts”), the committee authorizes the following when undertaken on terms comparable to those available in the open market: a. the selected bank, for the soma, to: i. undertake reverse repo transactions in eligible securities held in the soma with the customer accounts for a term of 65 business days or less; and ii. undertake repo transactions in eligible securities with foreign accounts; and b. any federal reserve bank that maintains customer accounts, for any such customer account, when appropriate and subject to all other necessary authorization and approvals, to: i. undertake repo transactions in eligible securities with dealers with a corresponding reverse repo transaction in such eligible securities with the customer accounts; and ii. undertake intra-day repo transactions in eligible securities with foreign accounts. transactions undertaken with customer accounts under the provisions of this paragraph 4 may provide for a service fee when appropriate. transactions undertaken with customer accounts are also subject to the authorization or approval of other entities, including the board of governors of the federal reserve system and, when involving accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank as fiscal agent of the united states, the united states department of the treasury. additional matters 5. the committee authorizes the chair of the committee, in fostering the committee’s objectives during any period between meetings of the committee, to instruct the selected bank to act on behalf of the committee to: a. adjust somewhat in exceptional circumstances the stance of monetary policy and to take actions that may result in material changes in the composition and size of the assets in the soma; or b. undertake transactions with respect to eligible securities in order to appropriately address temporary disruptions of an operational or highly unusual nature in u.s. dollar funding markets. any such adjustment described in subparagraph a of this paragraph 5 shall be made in the context of the committee’s discussion and decision about the stance of policy at its most recent meeting and the committee’s long-run objectives to foster maximum employment and price stability, and shall be based on economic, financial,  minutes of the meeting of january 26–27, 2021 page 5 and monetary developments since the most recent meeting of the committee. the chair, whenever feasible, will consult with the committee before making any instruction under this paragraph 5. c. in consultation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities, foreign central banks, and international monetary institutions. d. at prevailing market rates. authorization for foreign currency operations (as reaffirmed effective january 26, 2021) standalone spot and forward transactions in general 1. the federal open market committee (the “committee”) authorizes the federal reserve bank selected by the committee (the “selected bank”) to execute open market transactions for the system open market account as provided in this authorization, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the committee: a. to purchase and sell foreign currencies (also known as cable transfers) at home and abroad in the open market, including with the united states treasury, with foreign monetary authorities, with the bank for international settlements, and with other entities in the open market. this authorization to purchase and sell foreign currencies encompasses purchases and sales through standalone spot or forward transactions and through foreign exchange swap transactions. for purposes of this authorization, foreign exchange swap transactions are: swap transactions with the united states treasury (also known as warehousing transactions), swap transactions with other central banks under reciprocal currency arrangements, swap transactions with other central banks under standing dollar liquidity and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements, and swap transactions with other entities in the open market. b. to hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to receive or to deliver, foreign currencies. 2. all transactions in foreign currencies undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall, unless otherwise authorized by the committee, be conducted: a. in a manner consistent with the obligations regarding exchange arrangements under article iv of the articles of agreement of the international monetary fund (imf).1 b. in close and continuous cooperation and consultation, as appropriate, with the united states treasury. 3. for any operation that involves standalone spot or forward transactions in foreign currencies: a. approval of such operation is required as follows: i. the committee must direct the selected bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.c of this authorization, exceeding $5 billion since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the committee. the foreign currency subcommittee (the “subcommittee”) must direct the selected bank in advance to execute the operation if the subcommittee believes that consultation with the committee is not feasible in the time available. ii. the committee authorizes the subcommittee to direct the selected bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.c of this authorization, totaling $5 billion or less since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the committee. b. such an operation also shall be: i. generally directed at countering disorderly market conditions; or ii. undertaken to adjust system balances in light of probable future needs for currencies; or iii. conducted for such other purposes as may be determined by the committee. c. for purposes of this authorization, the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of the dollar values of individual foreign currencies purchased and sold, valued at the time of the transaction.  page 6 federal open market committee warehousing 4. the committee authorizes the selected bank, with the prior approval of the subcommittee and at the request of the united states treasury, to conduct swap transactions with the united states exchange stabilization fund established by section 10 of the gold reserve act of 1934 under agreements in which the selected bank purchases foreign currencies from the exchange stabilization fund and the exchange stabilization fund repurchases the foreign currencies from the selected bank at a later date (such purchases and sales also known as warehousing). reciprocal currency arrangements, and standing dollar and foreign currency liquidity swaps 5. the committee authorizes the selected bank to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements established under the north american framework agreement, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements as provided in this authorization and to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the committee. a. for reciprocal currency arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the committee (or by the subcommittee, if the subcommittee believes that consultation with the committee is not feasible in the time available). b. for standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the chair. the chair may approve a schedule of potential drawings, and may delegate to the manager, system open market account, the authority to approve individual drawings that occur according to the schedule approved by the chair. c. for standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the committee (or by the subcommittee, if the subcommittee believes that consultation with the committee is not feasible in the time available). d. operations involving standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements shall generally be directed at countering strains in financial markets in the united states or abroad, or reducing the risk that they could emerge, so as to mitigate their effects on economic and financial conditions in the united states. e. for reciprocal currency arrangements, standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements: i. all arrangements are subject to annual review and approval by the committee; ii. any new arrangements must be approved by the committee; and iii. any changes in the terms of existing arrangements must be approved in advance by the chair. the chair shall keep the committee informed of any changes in terms, and the terms shall be consistent with principles discussed with and guidance provided by the committee. other operations in foreign currencies 6. any other operations in foreign currencies for which governance is not otherwise specified in this authorization (such as foreign exchange swap transactions with private-sector counterparties) must be authorized and directed in advance by the committee. foreign currency holdings 7. the committee authorizes the selected bank to hold foreign currencies for the system open market account in accounts maintained at foreign central banks, the bank for international settlements, and such other foreign institutions as approved by the board of governors under section 214.5 of regulation n, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the committee. a. the selected bank shall manage all holdings of foreign currencies for the system open market account: i. primarily, to ensure sufficient liquidity to enable the selected bank to conduct foreign currency operations as directed by the committee; ii. secondarily, to maintain a high degree of safety; iii. subject to paragraphs 7.a.i and 7.a.ii, to provide the highest rate of return possible in each currency; and iv. to achieve such other objectives as may be authorized by the committee.  minutes of the meeting of january 26–27, 2021 page 7 b. the selected bank may manage such foreign currency holdings by: i. purchasing and selling obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, a foreign government or agency thereof (“permitted foreign securities”) through outright purchases and sales; ii. purchasing permitted foreign securities under agreements for repurchase of such permitted foreign securities and selling such securities under agreements for the resale of such securities; and iii. managing balances in various time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions approved by the board of governors under regulation n. c. the subcommittee, in consultation with the committee, may provide additional instructions to the selected bank regarding holdings of foreign currencies. additional matters 8. the committee authorizes the chair: a. with the prior approval of the committee, to enter into any needed agreement or understanding with the secretary of the united states treasury about the division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the system and the united states treasury; b. to advise the secretary of the united states treasury concerning system foreign currency operations, and to consult with the secretary on policy matters relating to foreign currency operations; c. to designate federal reserve system persons authorized to communicate with the united states treasury concerning system open market account foreign currency operations; and d. from time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information to the national advisory council on international monetary and financial policies. 9. the committee authorizes the selected bank to undertake transactions of the type described in this authorization, and foreign exchange and investment transactions that it may be otherwise authorized to undertake, from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness. the aggregate amount of such transactions shall not exceed $2.5 billion per calendar year. these transactions shall be conducted with prior notice to the committee. 10. all federal reserve banks shall participate in the foreign currency operations for system open market account in accordance with paragraph 3g(1) of the board of governors’ statement of procedure with respect to foreign relationships of federal reserve banks dated january 1, 1944. 11. any authority of the subcommittee pursuant to this authorization may be exercised by the chair if the chair believes that consultation with the subcommittee is not feasible in the time available. the chair shall promptly report to the subcommittee any action approved by the chair pursuant to this paragraph. 12. the committee authorizes the chair, in exceptional circumstances where it would not be feasible to convene the committee, to foster the committee’s objectives by instructing the selected bank to engage in foreign currency operations not otherwise authorized pursuant to this authorization. any such action shall be made in the context of the committee’s discussion and decisions regarding foreign currency operations. the chair, whenever feasible, will consult with the committee before making any instruction under this paragraph.  in general, as specified in article iv, each member of the imf undertakes to collaborate with the imf and other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates. these obligations include seeking to direct the member’s economic and financial policies toward the objective of fostering orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability. these obligations also include avoiding manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in such a way that would impede effective balance of payments adjustment or to give an unfair competitive advantage over other members. 1 foreign currency directive (as reaffirmed effective january 26, 2021) 1. the committee directs the federal reserve bank selected by the committee (the “selected bank”) to execute open market transactions, for the system open market account, in accordance with the provisions of the authorization for foreign currency operations (the “authorization”) and subject to the limits in this directive. 2. the committee directs the selected bank to execute warehousing transactions, if so requested by the united states treasury and if approved by the foreign currency subcommittee (the “subcommittee”), subject to the limitation that the outstanding balance of united states dollars provided to the united states treasury as  page 8 federal open market committee a result of these transactions not at any time exceed $5 billion. 3. the committee directs the selected bank to maintain, for the system open market account: a. reciprocal currency arrangements with the following foreign central banks: foreign central bank bank of canada bank of mexico maximum amount (millions of dollars or equivalent) 2,000 3,000 b. standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements with the following foreign central banks: bank of canada bank of england bank of japan european central bank swiss national bank c. temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements with the following foreign central banks: reserve bank of australia national bank of denmark reserve bank of new zealand bank of norway bank of sweden central bank of brazil bank of mexico bank of korea monetary authority of singapore d. standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the following foreign central banks: bank of canada bank of england bank of japan european central bank swiss national bank 4. the committee directs the selected bank to hold and to invest foreign currencies in the portfolio in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 7 of the authorization. 5. the committee directs the selected bank to report to the committee, at each regular meeting of the committee, on transactions undertaken pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 6 of the authorization. the selected bank is also directed to provide quarterly reports to the committee regarding the management of the foreign currency holdings pursuant to paragraph 7 of the authorization. 6. the committee directs the selected bank to conduct testing of transactions for the purpose of operational readiness in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9 of the authorization. by unanimous vote, the committee reaffirmed its program for security of fomc information with minor technical changes. in the committee’s annual reconsideration of the statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, all participants supported the statement as written, and the committee voted unanimously to reaffirm without revision. statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy (as reaffirmed effective january 26, 2021) the federal open market committee (fomc) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. the committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to these disturbances. the committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. the committee judges that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. therefore, the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently  minutes of the meeting of january 26–27, 2021 page 9 than in the past. owing in part to the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound, the committee judges that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. the committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. the maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. the committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. the inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. the committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the federal reserve’s statutory mandate. the committee judges that longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhance the committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. in order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. in setting monetary policy, the committee seeks over time to mitigate shortfalls of employment from the committee’s assessment of its maximum level and deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal. moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a stable financial system. therefore, the committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. however, under circum- stances in which the committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. the committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each january, and to undertake roughly every 5 years a thorough public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments. the evolving outlooks for the path of the virus and for fiscal policy were the main drivers of financial markets over the intermeeting period. progress on vaccinations had been slower than expected, and the near-term trajectory of the pandemic worsened, weighing on economic activity. however, even with the appearance of new strains of the virus, market confidence in the ultimate efficacy of the vaccination efforts seemed to remain high. the emergence of a narrow democratic majority in the senate bolstered investor expectations for additional fiscal stimulus, prompting upward revisions to forecasts for economic growth this year. in the open market desk survey of primary dealers, the median 2021 gross domestic product (gdp) growth forecast rose about 1 percentage point. against this backdrop, longer-term treasury yields rose notably over the period. longer-dated real yields were lifted by expectations for improved growth and increased treasury issuance, but remained deeply negative. measures of inflation compensation increased over the period, with the five-year, five-year-forward measure rising to a level of around 2 percent. overall financial conditions eased further, on net, as the recent rally in risk assets continued. gains in u.s. equities again centered on cyclical sectors and smaller-capitalization firms most sensitive to growth. credit spreads narrowed further, especially for riskier borrowers. expectations for the path of the target federal funds rate over the next several years, as implied by interest rate futures and by the desk survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants, were relatively little changed from december. the stability in near-term policy rate expectations amid an improving growth outlook appeared consistent with the committee’s new framework and forward interest rate guidance. although the median desk survey respondent continued to expect  page 10 federal open market committee 12-month personal consumption expenditure (pce) inflation of 2.3 percent when the fomc first lifts the target range, the median expectation for the unemployment rate prevailing at that time was modestly lower than in december. the desk survey results indicated that a majority of market participants anticipated that the pace of net asset purchases would remain stable for the remainder of the year and slow around the first quarter of 2022. the manager next discussed conditions in funding markets. over the year-end, overnight secured and unsecured rates were little changed at rates just below the interest on excess reserves (ioer) rate even as financial firms managed their balance sheets for the reporting date. going forward, reserves were projected to rise rapidly through the summer, reflecting ongoing federal reserve asset purchases as well as expected declines in balances held in the treasury general account. market pricing suggested that the effective federal funds rate was expected to decline modestly through the second quarter. even if more notable downward pressure on money market rates emerged, the manager anticipated that the federal reserve’s tools, including the ioer rate and overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility, would continue to provide effective control over the federal funds rate and other overnight money market rates. finally, the manager discussed desk operations. a range of indicators suggested that both fixed-income and funding markets continued to function smoothly over the period. the manager noted that, in the coming period, the desk anticipated implementing two adjustments to continue to normalize operations. first, given the sustained stability in term repurchase markets, the desk proposed discontinuing the weekly one-month term repurchase operations, beginning in mid-february. in addition, the desk planned to reduce the frequency of agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) operations in light of the sustained improvement in market conditions for these securities. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. no intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the covid-19 pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activity in the united states and abroad. the information available at the time of the january 26–27 meeting suggested that u.s. real gdp had continued to advance in the fourth quarter of 2020, albeit at a pace that was markedly slower than the rapid rate seen in the third quarter, while the level of real gdp had not yet returned to the level seen before the onset of the pandemic. labor market conditions deteriorated, on balance, in december, and employment continued to be well below its level at the start of 2020. consumer price inflation through november—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the pce price index—remained considerably lower than the rates seen in early 2020. total nonfarm payroll employment fell in december, with especially sharp declines in the leisure and hospitality sector. as of december, payroll employment had retraced a little more than half of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. the unemployment rate held steady at 6.7 percent in december. the unemployment rate for african americans declined and the hispanic unemployment rate rose; both rates remained well above the national average. however, the asian unemployment rate moved below the national average in december. both the labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio were unchanged in december. initial claims for unemployment insurance in mid-january were higher than their early december level. weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by federal reserve board staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp indicated that the four-week average change in private employment in mid-january was slightly lower than it had been in early december; however, the most recent week-to-week changes in this measure of payrolls had been highly volatile. average hourly earnings for all employees rose 5.1 percent over the 12 months ending in december, a gain that was noticeably higher than the measure’s year-earlier 12-month change. the 12-month change in average hourly earnings continued to be dominated by changes in the composition of the workforce, with the concentration of job losses among lower-wage workers over the pandemic period resulting in outsized increases in this measure of earnings that were not indicative of tight labor market conditions. by contrast, a staff measure of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the adp data—a measure likely to have been less affected by changes in workforce composition—was 3½ percent in december and remained well below its pre-pandemic pace. total pce price inflation was 1.1 percent over the 12 months ending in november and continued to be held down by relatively weak aggregate demand and the declines in consumer energy prices seen over the first  minutes of the meeting of january 26–27, 2021 page 11 part of 2020. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in november, while the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 1.7 percent in november. in december, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 1.4 percent, while core cpi inflation was 1.6 percent over the same period. the latest readings on survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations ticked higher. in the first part of january, the university of michigan surveys of consumers measure for the next 5 to 10 years moved back up to its late-summer level, while in december, the 3-year-ahead measure of inflation expectations produced by the federal reserve bank of new york moved back up to its august level. real pce fell in november, and available indicators— including the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate pce—pointed to a further decline in december. housing starts and construction permits moved up in november and december and finished the year well above their pre-pandemic levels. although home sales turned down in november, the decline appeared to reflect limited availability of homes for sale rather than weakening demand. available indicators pointed to a strong increase in investment in equipment and intangibles in the fourth quarter of 2020, as this component of capital spending recovered from its sharp decline over the first half of the year. likewise, drilling investment appeared to have turned up sharply, albeit from a low level, as oil prices moved higher. by contrast, investment in nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector appeared to have declined further in the fourth quarter and had likely been restrained by firms’ continued hesitation to commit to projects with lengthy times to completion and uncertain future returns. industrial production advanced further in the fourth quarter, led by a solid gain in manufacturing output, but had not yet overtaken its pre-pandemic level. the low level of export demand since the onset of the pandemic had likely continued to restrain the recovery in the manufacturing sector; in addition, production of motor vehicles and parts was a small drag on manufacturing output in the fourth quarter as automotive producers appeared to have had difficulty getting assemblies fully under way for the new model year. total real government purchases appeared to have fallen further in the fourth quarter, though at a slower pace than in the third quarter. available data suggested that real federal purchases had posted a modest gain, as an increase in defense purchases offset a reduction in nondefense purchases; however, indicators of real state and local purchases, including state and local government employment, pointed to a fourth-quarter decline similar in size to what had been seen in the third quarter. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit widened further in november. both imports and exports continued to rebound from their collapse in the first half of the year. goods imports rose in november to a level well above that of the previous january, with gains in most major categories. although exports also grew in november, they had not yet recovered to their january 2020 level. services trade continued a gradual rise but remained depressed, driven by the continued suspension of most international travel. taken together, these data suggested that net exports made a significant negative contribution to real gdp growth in the fourth quarter. recent data pointed to a sharp slowing in foreign economic growth in the fourth quarter, after a strong rebound in the third quarter. amid a further intensification of the pandemic, many foreign governments tightened social-distancing restrictions. in a few countries, the emergence of new and more contagious virus strains was accompanied by a surge in covid-19 cases and deaths. the increased virus spread and restrictions appeared to take a toll on foreign economic activity, particularly in europe. the global slowdown was most notable for services, with further declines in purchasing managers indexes for this sector through january in many advanced foreign economies. by contrast, manufacturing output in both advanced and emerging foreign economies continued to expand at a solid pace, supported by resilient demand for durable goods, high-tech goods, and medical supplies. amid the generally weak economic situation, inflationary pressures remained subdued in most foreign economies. staff review of the financial situation investor sentiment improved and risk asset prices moved higher over the intermeeting period on greater prospects for additional fiscal stimulus. domestic and foreign equity prices increased notably, and spreads on corporate and municipal bonds narrowed. the nominal treasury yield curve steepened, partly reflecting an increase in inflation compensation. market-based financing conditions remained accommodative, while bank lending conditions continued to be tight. however, a smaller net share of banks tightened lending standards than in previous quarters.  page 12 federal open market committee a straight read of overnight index swap (ois) quotes suggested that the expected path of the federal funds rate beyond mid-2023 rose moderately over the intermeeting period, with the increases reportedly associated largely with greater investor optimism regarding the expected speed of the economic recovery. ois quotes suggested that the expected policy rate would remain below 25 basis points until the third quarter of 2023, little changed from the time of the december meeting. the yield on 2-year nominal treasury securities was little changed over the intermeeting period, while the 10-year yield rose notably. most of the steepening of the treasury yield curve occurred following the outcome of the georgia runoff elections, which reportedly bolstered market participants’ expectations for additional fiscal stimulus. the fomc’s updated guidance around asset purchases was seen as broadly in line with expectations and did not elicit noticeable financial market reaction. measures of inflation compensation based on treasury inflation-protected securities increased moderately, on net, continuing the upward trend observed over recent months, with the increase over the intermeeting period reportedly reflecting greater prospects for additional fiscal stimulus and an associated improvement in the longer-run economic outlook. broad stock price indexes increased, on net, over the intermeeting period, boosted by gains in the share prices of banks and companies in more cyclically sensitive sectors, reportedly reflecting, in part, increased expectations of fiscal stimulus. one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—was little changed, on net, remaining modestly elevated relative to its range over the past several years. consistent with the optimism driving stock prices, spreads on corporate bond yields over comparable-maturity treasury yields narrowed somewhat. spreads on municipal bond yields narrowed notably in january, reportedly reflecting increased expectations of additional fiscal stimulus and aid to state and local governments. conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period, including over the yearend. spreads for commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit across tenors were largely unchanged at historically low levels. commercial paper outstanding declined somewhat in late december but quickly rebounded in early january to the levels observed before year-end. amid stable market conditions, there was no take-up at the commercial paper funding facility or the money market mutual fund liquidity facility over the intermeeting period. assets under management (aum) of government money market funds (mmfs) remained stable over the intermeeting period. aum of prime mmfs continued to decline, reaching the lowest level since late 2018, likely reflecting the compressed net yield advantage for prime funds relative to yields for government funds. the net yields of both prime and government mmfs remained near historically low levels. the effective federal funds rate and the secured overnight financing rate were little changed, averaging 9 basis points and 8 basis points, respectively, over the intermeeting period. there continued to be no participation in the fed’s repurchase agreement (repo) operations, and participation in the fed’s reverse repo facility was minimal. in foreign financial markets, the prospect of additional u.s. fiscal stimulus and the passage of key risk events such as the brexit trade agreement largely outweighed investor concerns around new virus strains and the sluggish global vaccine rollout. on balance, foreign equity prices increased moderately, with notable outperformance in some asian indexes, and capital inflows into mutual funds dedicated to emerging markets continued at a robust pace. longer-term sovereign yields in most advanced foreign economies rose slightly on improved investor sentiment even while several major central banks reaffirmed their commitment to continue or possibly expand accommodative policies. the broad dollar index was little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period, while the chinese renminbi appreciated notably against the dollar as data showed a robust economic recovery in china. dollar funding conditions were generally stable around year-end. financing conditions in capital markets remained broadly accommodative, supported by low interest rates and high equity valuations. gross corporate bond issuance was fairly strong in november and december, and seasoned and initial public offerings in the equity markets were robust. gross institutional leveraged loan issuance was also strong in december, as issuance volumes excluding refinancing topped their averages for previous months of 2020 and were above those observed during the same period of 2019. commercial and industrial (c&i) loan balances at banks continued to decline in december, albeit at a slower pace than in the fall. c&i loans declined in the fourth quarter because of weak origination activity, loan forgiveness at the paycheck protection program, and continued repayments of bank debt. in the january senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks, on net, reported weaker demand and tightened  minutes of the meeting of january 26–27, 2021 page 13 lending standards for c&i loans, with notable differences in reported changes across bank sizes. large banks reported having eased standards to large and middle-market firms, while, on net, banks of all sizes reported having tightened standards to small firms. however, a smaller net percentage of banks tightened lending standards to firms of all sizes than in previous quarters. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained stable in recent months after deteriorating substantially for several months following the onset of the pandemic. the volume of nonfinancial corporate bond downgrades continued to slightly outpace upgrades in november and december, and the monthly volume of nonfinancial corporate bond defaults remained relatively low. market indicators of future default expectations moved slightly lower, essentially returning to their pre-pandemic levels. financing conditions for small businesses remained tight, but small business loan originations in november, the most recent month for which data were available, were at roughly the level seen a year earlier, likely supported by the refinancing of existing loans. meanwhile, liquidity needs of small businesses remained high as businesses continued to operate at reduced capacity. small business delinquency and default rates were little changed but remained elevated relative to the levels of recent years. financing conditions in the municipal bond market remained generally accommodative over the intermeeting period, and the credit quality of municipal debt remained roughly stable. for commercial real estate (cre) financed through capital markets, financing conditions remained generally accommodative, easing further over the intermeeting period. spreads on agency cmbs ticked down, on net, and issuance remained elevated through december, although below its recent historical high in october. risk spreads on triple-b non-agency cmbs declined, and spreads on triple-a non-agency cmbs stayed close to their historical lows. issuance of non-agency cmbs remained somewhat below its pre-pandemic level. cre bank loan growth remained weak in the fourth quarter amid depressed property transaction volumes. on net, in the january sloos, banks reported a further tightening of lending standards and further weakening in demand for cre loans. financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were little changed over the intermeeting period. mortgage rates ticked up slightly but stayed near historically low levels, supporting strong loan origination activity. credit remained broadly available to higher-score bor- rowers seeking conforming mortgages but tightened further, from already tight levels, for borrowers with lower credit scores and those seeking nonconforming mortgages. the january sloos suggested that for most types of residential mortgages, banks’ lending standards remained unchanged, while loan demand was either little changed or somewhat stronger. mortgage forbearance rates plateaued in december and early january after having gradually declined over the previous six months, and the rate of new delinquencies stayed at low, pre-pandemic levels. financing conditions in consumer credit markets generally remained accommodative for borrowers with strong credit scores but tight for those with subprime scores. banks in the january sloos reported easing standards for all consumer loan types and experiencing weaker demand for auto loans and little-changed demand for other consumer loans. conditions in the asset-backed securities market appeared supportive of lending. credit card balances edged down further for both prime and nonprime borrowers, likely reflecting weak consumer spending. however, the volume of new cards and available credit continued to rise for both prime and nonprime borrowers. interest rates on new credit card offers for nonprime borrowers stayed elevated, and financing conditions remained tight for those borrowers. auto loan balances continued to increase solidly for prime and near-prime borrowers but declined further for subprime borrowers. auto loan interest rates were about flat over the past few months and remained significantly below their pre-pandemic levels. delinquency rates for nonprime auto and credit card borrowers ticked up, albeit from very low levels. the staff provided an update on its assessments of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, characterized the financial vulnerabilities of the u.s. financial system as notable. the staff assessed asset valuation pressures as elevated. in particular, corporate bond spreads had declined to pre-pandemic levels, which were at the lower ends of their historical distributions. in addition, measures of the equity risk premium declined further, returning to pre-pandemic levels. prices for industrial and multifamily properties continued to grow through 2020 at about the same pace as in the past several years, while prices of office buildings and retail establishments started to fall. the staff assessed vulnerabilities associated with household and business borrowing as notable, reflecting increased leverage and decreased incomes and revenues in 2020. small businesses were hit particularly hard. the staff judged that vulner-  page 14 federal open market committee abilities stemming from financial leverage were moderate, noting that capital ratios at the largest bank holding companies rose over the course of last year; leverage among hedge funds was elevated but it did decline last spring for the most highly leveraged funds. the staff characterized vulnerabilities stemming from funding risks as moderate. banks continued to maintain significant levels of high-quality liquid assets and stable sources of funding. in contrast, money market funds and openended mutual funds were characterized by significant vulnerabilities associated with liquidity transformation. staff economic outlook the u.s. economic projection prepared by the staff for the january fomc meeting implied a considerably stronger outlook for activity in 2021 relative to the december forecast. although incoming data had been weaker than expected, the staff’s january projection incorporated the effects of the stimulus in the recently enacted consolidated appropriations act, 2021 (caa), together with an assumption that an additional sizable tranche of fiscal support would be put into place in coming months. taken together, these stimulus measures were expected to partly offset the substantial drag on aggregate demand that would result from the unwinding of the fiscal stimulus enacted in the spring of 2020. the staff’s projection continued to anticipate that widespread vaccination would allow for an easing in social distancing in 2021. with the boost to growth from the reduction in social distancing assumed to be largely completed by the end of 2021, gdp growth was expected to step down over the remainder of the medium term. even so, the staff continued to project that real gdp growth would outpace that of potential over this period, leading to a considerable further decline in the unemployment rate. the 12-month changes in total and core pce prices in coming months were projected to briefly move above 2 percent in the second quarter of 2021 as the unusually low observations from the spring of 2020 drop out of the 12-month calculation. following these swings, inflation was expected to finish the year at just below 2 percent. thereafter, inflation was projected to gradually edge up to 2 percent by the end of the medium term as labor and product markets tightened. with monetary policy assumed to remain accommodative, inflation was projected to moderately overshoot 2 percent for some time in the years beyond 2023. the staff viewed the possibility that a larger-than-anticipated fiscal package would be enacted in coming months as a modest upside risk to the baseline economic outlook. however, the further rise in covid-19 cases in the united states, coupled with developments such as the emergence of more-contagious strains of the virus in the united states and elsewhere, led the staff to continue to judge that the risks to the baseline projection were skewed to the downside and that the uncertainty around the forecast was elevated. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook participants noted that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. the pace of the recovery in economic activity and employment had moderated in recent months, with weakness concentrated in the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the resurgence of the virus and by greater social distancing. weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices were holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting the federal reserve’s actions to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations, and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook. participants observed that the resurgence in covid-19 infections and associated social-distancing measures were restraining activity in some sectors, particularly in industries such as travel and leisure and hospitality. most participants expected that the stimulus provided by the passage of the caa in december, the likelihood of additional fiscal support, and anticipated continued progress in vaccinations would lead to a sizable boost in economic activity. even so, participants noted that economic activity and employment were currently well below levels consistent with achieving maximum employment. participants commented on improved prospects for household spending over the course of the year, in part reflecting fiscal support. they saw progress on vaccinations as essential for supporting further gains in aggregate consumer spending and for the economic recovery more generally. in commenting on recent data for household spending, most participants discussed the composition of expenditures, with strong spending on  minutes of the meeting of january 26–27, 2021 page 15 many goods, especially durables, and weakness in spending on some services, especially in travel and in leisure and hospitality. the relative strength in consumer spending on goods was supported by fiscal programs such as federal stimulus payments and expanded unemployment benefits as well as by accommodative monetary policy. the weakness in services spending was largely attributed to the pandemic and associated socialdistancing measures, which limited spending on services that depend heavily on in-person contact. increased government transfers to households, combined with reduced outlays on some services, had contributed to a historically large increase in aggregate household savings last year. participants also observed that residential investment and home sales remained robust; low interest rates were viewed as an important factor supporting the strength in housing activity. most participants noted that the economic downturn had not fallen equally on all americans and that those least able to shoulder the burden—in particular, lowerincome and black and hispanic households—had been the hardest hit by the pandemic. many participants stressed that sustained support from fiscal policy would help address the hardships faced by these groups and that monetary policy could also help by promoting the economy’s return to maximum employment and price stability. in their remarks on the business sector, participants commented that business equipment investment had continued to show strength while nonresidential construction remained weak. participants also discussed the recent strong performance of the manufacturing sector. many discussed supply chain issues in manufacturing, including those associated with acquiring material inputs and pandemic-related worker shortages and absenteeism. business contacts reported that firms in goods-producing industries, particularly larger firms and those in the durable goods or housing sectors, were adapting to the pandemic; in contrast, smaller firms and those in industries most adversely affected by the pandemic were finding it more difficult to adapt. many participants stated that their business contacts were optimistic that continued progress on vaccinations, together with further fiscal support, would result in more improvement in overall business conditions. several participants noted the increase in agricultural crop prices over 2020 and the associated improvement in farm revenues. as with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement in the labor market had slowed in recent months. payroll employment fell in december, as continued job gains in many industries were outweighed by significant layoffs in industries where the resurgence of the virus had weighed heavily on activity. while labor market conditions had improved significantly, on balance, since the spring, some participants noted that if the sizable number of workers who reported having left the labor force since the beginning of the pandemic were to be counted as unemployed, the unemployment rate would be substantially higher. participants judged that the current low level of labor force participation likely reflected a number of factors, including health concerns and additional childcare responsibilities. over the medium term, participants expected strong growth in employment, driven by continued progress on vaccinations and an associated rebound of economic activity and of consumer and business confidence, as well as accommodative fiscal and monetary policy. however, participants observed that the economy was far from achieving the committee’s broad-based and inclusive goal of maximum employment and that even with a brisk pace of improvement in the labor market, achieving this goal would take some time. in their comments about inflation, participants noted that headline pce price inflation in december, measured on a 12-month basis, was poised to come in well below the committee’s 2 percent longer-term objective. in the relatively near term, a number of participants suggested that there could be increases in the prices of some goods whose production has been subject to supply chain constraints, or soon could be; others anticipated that a possibly abrupt return to normal levels of activity could result in one-time increases in certain prices. many participants stressed the importance of distinguishing between such one-time changes in relative prices and changes in the underlying trend for inflation, noting that changes in relative prices could temporarily raise measured inflation but would be unlikely to have a lasting effect. some participants further observed that 12-month pce inflation was likely to move somewhat above 2 percent for a brief period in the spring as the unusually low monthly observations from last spring roll out of the 12-month calculation. outside of such nearterm fluctuations, participants generally anticipated that inflation would move up along a trajectory consistent with achieving the committee’s objectives over time, supported by stronger economic activity, widespread vaccinations and the associated reduction in social distancing, and accommodative fiscal and monetary policy. some participants pointed to the continued increase in market-based measures of inflation compensation from the very low levels recorded in the spring as consistent  page 16 federal open market committee with the view that inflation was likely to move up gradually over time; others noted that survey-based measures were little changed, on net, over the year as a whole. participants noted that overall financial conditions remained highly accommodative, in part reflecting investors’ optimism about the economic outlook along with the accommodative stance of monetary policy and recent and expected future fiscal policy measures. however, a few participants remarked that credit conditions were relatively tight for borrowers with low credit scores and for some small and medium-sized businesses that rely on bank lending rather than capital markets to meet their financing needs. while generally acknowledging that the medium-term outlook for real gdp growth and employment had improved, participants continued to see the uncertainty surrounding that outlook as elevated. participants agreed that the path of the economy depended significantly on the course of the virus and progress on vaccinations. many participants remarked that the pandemic continued to pose considerable risks to the economic outlook, including risks associated with new virus strains, potential public resistance to vaccination, and potential difficulties in the production and distribution of vaccines. with regard to upside risks, some participants pointed to the possibility that fiscal policy could turn out to be more expansionary than anticipated, that households could display greater willingness to spend out of accumulated savings than expected, or that widespread vaccinations and easing of social distancing could result in a more rapid boost to spending and employment than anticipated. participants generally viewed the risks to the outlook for inflation as having become more balanced than was the case over most of 2020, although most still viewed the risks as weighted to the downside. as an upside risk to inflation, several participants noted the potential for pandemic-related supply constraints to affect price inflation somewhat more than anticipated or for price increases among industries most adversely affected by the pandemic to be more pronounced than projected. a number of participants commented on issues related to financial stability. several participants noted areas of strength. for example, the banking system had shown considerable resilience since the onset of the pandemic. banks’ capital positions had generally remained solid, and earnings were strong. in addition, results from the most recent stress tests indicated that the largest banks could withstand very stressed economic conditions. that said, a few participants stated that it would be important to stay vigilant to ensure that the banking system remained strong and resilient. in addition, several participants noted that the pandemic had highlighted structural vulnerabilities in other parts of the financial system. these included run-prone investment funds in shortterm funding and credit markets as well as fragilities in treasury market functioning; stresses stemming from these vulnerabilities had required substantial intervention by the federal reserve in the turbulent market conditions at the onset of the pandemic. a couple of participants commented that it would be important for the appropriate regulatory bodies to address these financial stability vulnerabilities. regarding asset valuations, some participants commented that equity valuations had risen further, that initial public offering activity was elevated, or that valuations might have been affected by retail investors trading through electronic platforms. in addition, risk spreads on corporate bonds and loans were generally low, even with corporate indebtedness having risen to high levels. a few participants noted that some cre in sectors that had been most directly affected by the pandemic—such as those involving retail establishments and hotels—faced the prospect of falling prices and increased stress. in their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, participants reaffirmed the federal reserve’s commitment to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations, and that the ongoing public health crisis had continued to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation. participants noted that as the pandemic had worsened across the country in recent months, the pace of the recovery had moderated, with weakness concentrated in the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic. in contrast, participants remarked that the prospect of an effective vaccine program, the recently enacted fiscal support, and the potential for additional fiscal actions had led them to judge that the medium-term outlook had improved. that said, participants agreed that the economy remained far from the committee’s longer-run goals and that the path ahead remained highly uncertain, with the pandemic continuing to pose considerable risks to the outlook. in their discussion of the outlook for monetary policy, participants judged that maintaining a highly accommodative stance of policy was essential to foster further  minutes of the meeting of january 26–27, 2021 page 17 economic recovery and to achieve an average inflation rate of 2 percent over time. participants noted that economic conditions were currently far from the committee’s longer-run goals and that the stance for policy would need to remain accommodative until those goals were achieved. consequently, all participants supported maintaining the committee’s current settings and outcome-based guidance for the federal funds rate and the pace of asset purchases. participants noted that the committee’s current guidance was well suited to the current environment because it describes how policy would respond based on the path of the economy. for example, if progress toward the committee’s goals proved slower than anticipated, the outcome-based guidance would convey the committee’s intention to respond by increasing monetary policy accommodation through maintaining the current level of the target range of the federal funds rate for longer and raising the expected path of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. in addition, participants noted that the committee’s current outcome-based guidance for both the federal funds rate and balance sheet appeared to be well understood by the public. in that context, participants emphasized that it was important to abstract from temporary factors affecting inflation—such as low past levels of prices dropping out of measures of annual price changes or relative price increases in some sectors brought about by supply constraints or disruptions—in judging whether inflation was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. participants noted that the increase in the federal reserve’s balance sheet since last march had materially eased financial conditions and was providing substantial support to the economy. the committee’s guidance for asset purchases indicated that asset purchases would continue at least at the current pace until substantial further progress toward its employment and inflation goals had been achieved. with the economy still far from those goals, participants judged that it was likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. various participants noted the importance of the committee clearly communicating its assessment of progress toward its longer-run goals well in advance of the time when it could be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of purchases. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. they noted that the pace of recovery in economic activity and employment had moderated in recent months, with weakness concentrated in sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic. weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices had been holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members also stated that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. in addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis had continued to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation and was posing considerable risks to the economic outlook. members agreed that the pandemic continued to pose considerable risks to the outlook. nonetheless, in light of the expected progress on vaccinations and the change in the outlook for fiscal policy, the medium-term prospects for the economy had improved enough that members decided that the reference in previous postmeeting statements to risks to the economic outlook over the medium term was no longer warranted. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. all members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. members expected to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until those outcomes were achieved. all members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, members agreed that it would be appropriate for the federal reserve to continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress  page 18 federal open market committee had been made toward the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. they judged that these asset purchases would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective january 28, 2021, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. • increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) by $40 billion per month. • increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. • • conduct repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. the covid-19 pandemic is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. the pace of the recovery in economic activity and employment has moderated in recent months, with weakness concentrated in the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic. weaker demand and earlier declines in oil prices have been holding down consumer price inflation. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy will depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. the ongoing public health crisis continues to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so  minutes of the meeting of january 26–27, 2021 page 19 that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. the committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, the federal reserve will continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. these asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, thomas i. barkin, raphael w. bostic, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, mary c. daly, charles l. evans, randal k. quarles, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective january 28, 2021. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, march 16– 17, 2021. the meeting adjourned at 10:25 a.m. on january 27, 2021. notation vote by notation vote completed on january 5, 2021, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on december 15–16, 2020.  james a. clouse secretary 
march 17, 2021 chair powell. good afternoon. i would like to start by noting that it has been a full year since the pandemic arrived with force on our shores. looking back, it was clear that addressing a fast-moving global pandemic would be plainly and primarily the realm of health- care providers and experts, and we are grateful to them and to all the essential workers for their service and sacrifice. the danger to the u.s. economy was also clear. congress provided by far the fastest and largest response to any postwar economic downturn, offering fiscal support for households, businesses, health-care providers, and state and local governments. here at the federal reserve, we rapidly deployed our full range of tools to provide relief and stability, to ensure that the recovery will be as strong as possible, and to limit lasting damage to the economy. we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. the economic fallout has been real and widespread, but with the benefit of perspective, we can say that some of the very worst economic outcomes have been avoided by swift and forceful action—from congress, from across government, and in cities and towns across the country. more people held on to their jobs, more businesses kept their doors open, and more incomes were saved as a result of these swift and forceful policy actions. and while we welcome these positive developments, no one should be complacent. at the fed, we will continue to provide the economy the support that it needs for as long as it takes. today the fomc kept interest rates near zero and maintained our sizable asset purchases. these measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete.  the path of the economy continues to depend significantly on the course of the virus and the measures undertaken to control its spread. since january, the number of new cases, hospitalizations, and deaths has fallen, and ongoing vaccinations offer hope for a return to more normal conditions later this year. in the meantime, continued observance of social-distancing measures and wearing masks will help us reach that goal as soon as possible. the economic recovery remains uneven and far from complete, and the path ahead remains uncertain. following the moderation in the pace of the recovery that began toward the end of last year, indicators of economic activity and employment have turned up recently, although the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the resurgence of the virus and by greater social distancing remain weak. household spending on goods has risen notably so far this year. in contrast, household spending on services remains low, especially in services that typically require people to gather closely, including travel and hospitality. the housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, while business investment and manufacturing production have also picked up. the overall recovery in economic activity since last spring is due importantly to unprecedented fiscal and monetary policy actions, which have provided essential support to households, businesses, and communities. the recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, and forecasts from fomc participants for economic growth this year have been revised up notably since our december summary of economic projections. in commenting on the stronger outlook, participants noted progress on vaccinations as well as recent fiscal policy. as with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have turned up recently. employment rose by 379,000 in february, as the leisure and hospitality sector recouped about  two-thirds of the jobs that were lost in december and january. nonetheless, employment in this sector is more than 3 million below its level at the onset of the pandemic. for the economy as a whole, employment is 9.5 million below its pre-pandemic level. the unemployment rate remains elevated at 6.2 percent in february; this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market remains notably below pre-pandemic levels. looking ahead, fomc participants project the unemployment rate to continue to decline; the median projection is 4.5 percent at the end of this year and moves down to 3.5 percent by the end of 2023. the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. in particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the service sector and for african americans and hispanics. the economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. overall inflation remains below our 2 percent longer-run objective. over the next few months, 12-month measures of inflation will move up as the very low readings from march and april of last year fall out of the calculation. beyond these base effects, we could also see upward pressure on prices if spending rebounds quickly as the economy continues to reopen, particularly if supply bottlenecks limit how quickly production can respond in the near term. however, these one-time increases in prices are likely to have only transient effects on inflation. the median inflation projection of fomc participants is 2.4 percent this year and declines to 2 percent next year before moving back up by the end of 2023. the fed’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the financial—the stability of the financial system. as we say in our statement on  longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, we view maximum employment as a “broad- based and inclusive goal.” our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. as the committee reiterated in today’s policy statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. with regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. i would note that a transitory rise in inflation above 2 percent, as seems likely to occur this year, would not meet this standard. in addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. the increase in our balance sheet since last march has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. the economy is a long way from our employment and inflation goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved. our forward guidance for the federal funds rate, along with our balance sheet guidance, will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. our guidance is outcome based and ties the path of the federal funds rate and the  balance sheet to progress toward reaching our employment and inflation goals. overall, our interest rate and balance sheet tools are providing powerful support to the economy and will continue to do so. to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we are committed to using our full range of tools to support the economy and to help assure that the recovery from this difficult period will be as robust as possible. thank you. i look forward to your questions. joe pavel. howard from reuters. howard schneider. hi, chair powell, and, and thanks for that. so could you talk us through how the, the forecasts for 2021 map into the “substantial further progress” definition—you know, 2.4 percent inflation—i understand that’s considered transitory. that still seems like some progress there, 4½ percent unemployment. is it time to start talking about talking about tapering yet? chair powell. [laughter] not yet. so, as you—as you pointed out, we’ve said that we would continue asset purchases at this pace until we see substantial further progress. and that’s actual progress, not forecast progress. so—and that’s a difference from, from our past approach. so—and what we mean by that is, is pretty straightforward. it is, we want to see that, that the labor markets have moved—labor market conditions have moved—you know, have made substantial progress toward maximum employment, and inflation has made substantial progress toward the 2 percent goal. that’s what we’re going to want to see. now, that obviously includes an element of judgment. and when we see—we’ll be—we’ll be carefully looking ahead.  we, we also understand that we, we will want to provide as much advance notice of any potential taper as possible. so when we see that we’re on track, when we see actual data coming in that suggests that we’re on track to perhaps achieve substantial further progress, then we’ll say so. and we’ll say so well in advance of any decision to actually taper. howard schneider. if, if i could follow up on that, this shift in the dots—why wouldn’t that suggest a weakening of the commitment here? an awful lot of people shifted into 2022, it seems. chair powell. i, i don’t see that at all. you know, we, we have a, a range of perspectives on the committee. i welcome that. and, you know, we, we have—we debate things, we discuss things, and we always come together around a—around a, a solution. but, you know, the, the strong bulk of the committee is, is not showing a rate increase during this forecast period. and, you know, as, as data improve, as the outlook improves very significantly since the december meeting, you would expect forecasts to move up. it’s probably not a surprise that some people would bring in their estimate of the appropriate time for liftoff. nonetheless, you know, the bulk of the committee—the, the largest part by far of the committee is, is—doesn’t show a rate increase during this period. and, again, part of that is wanting to see actual data rather than just a forecast at this point. we do expect that we’ll begin to make faster progress on both spending—you know, labor markets and inflation as the year goes on because of the progress with the vaccines, because of the fiscal support that we’re getting. we expect that to happen. but, you know, we’ll have to see it first. michelle smith. great, thank you. victoria. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. i wanted to ask about the supplementary leverage ratio. you know, there’s been a lot of talk about what you all are going to do this  month, which—i’m happy to hear an update if you have one. but just sort of more broadly, do you think, long term, that the leverage ratio poses problems for implementing monetary policy at a time when the reserve supply is going to remain large? and, if so, do you think the changes to the leverage ratio, including the slr, are the way to deal with that problem? chair powell. victoria, we’ll have something to announce on that in coming days. and i’m not going to expound upon your questions. why don’t you—why don’t you ask another question if you’d like to? because, because that one—i’m just going to say that we’ll have something in coming days. victoria guida. sure. okay. well, then i’ll ask about unemployment. you know, there’s—the unemployment rate is—you all have projections for the u-6 rate, but you’ve also been, you know, really emphasizing the fact that that’s not the only thing that you all are looking at. you’re also looking at labor force participation and things like that. so are you all looking at ways of maybe adding to how you’re projecting the unemployment rate to the summary of economic projections? chair powell. well, let me say, as we say in our statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, we look to a range of indicators on the labor market. we never only looked at the unemployment rate, which is the only indicator of, of labor market outcomes that’s in the sep. we look at a very broad range. you hear us talk all the time about participation; about employment to population, which is the combination of the two; about different measures of, of unemployment. so it’s wages, it’s, it’s the job flows, it’s, you know, all of those things. they go into an assessment—disparities of various groups. all that goes into an assessment of maximum employment.  the, the—trying to incorporate all of that into the summary of economic projections would not be practical. you know, obviously, the thing that we do include is just the unemployment rate, and that’s a very insufficient statistic. so—it, it doesn’t include a lot of other things that we—that we do look at. and i, i wouldn’t want to say that we’re looking to include the other dozen things that we look at into the sep. but at time—from time to time, we do look at, at adding different things. but i, i would just say the sep is, it’s a summary. it’s one device. it’s not going to include all of the things that we look at. i think you know the things that we look at—we, we talk about them all the time. so we’re not actually looking actively at significantly broadening those indicators in the sep right now. michelle smith. thank you. chris rugaber, associated press. chris rugaber. thank you. chair powell, i wanted to ask about the forecast overall. you’re forecasting a very low unemployment rate next year and in 2023, you have inflation—or, the fed overall is, in the sep, forecasting inflation at or above 2 percent by 2023, yet no rate hike in any of this—in any of this forecast horizon. so is this telling us that we could see a higher inflation rate than was projected? or do you not—as you’ve been talking about, is the unemployment rate insufficient? or what is this telling us about the fed’s reaction function, that it seems you’re meeting the fed’s dual mandate by 2023, yet, again, no rate hike expected? chair powell. so i guess the first thing to say is that the, the sep is not a committee forecast. it’s, it’s not something we sit around and debate and discuss and approve, and say, “this represents our, you know, our reaction function as a committee.” it’s a compilation of projections from different people. and i—since we don’t debate it or discuss it, it would be hard for me to say why—exactly why each participant did what they were going to do.  so all i would say about this is that we’ve—we laid out what i think is very clear guidance on liftoff. and it’s really three things: labor market conditions that are consistent with our estimates of maximum employment—and, as i mentioned, we consider a wide range of indicators in assessing labor market conditions, not just the unemployment rate; inflation that has reached 2 percent, and not just on a transitory basis; and inflation that’s on track to run moderately above 2 percent for some time. the first two of those three are very much data based; the third does have a little bit of a—of an element of expectations in it. so we are very much determined to implement this guidance in a robust way. it is the guidance that we chose carefully to implement our new framework. and to meet these standards, we’ll need to see data, as i mentioned. so what does—what does this, this sep really say? it says that we’re committed to our framework and to the guidance we’ve provided to implement that framework. we will wait until the requirements set forth in that guidance are clearly met before considering a change in our policy rate. and the last thing i’ll say is this: the state of the economy in two or three years is highly uncertain, and i wouldn’t want to focus too much on the exact timing of a potential rate increase that far into the future. so that’s how i would think about the, the sep. michelle smith. thank you. paul kiernan. paul kiernan. thank you, chairman powell. my question is twofold. one, how high are you comfortable letting inflation rise? there, there is some ambiguity in, in your new target, as you mentioned, “expectations driven.” and, and do you think that that ambiguity might cause markets to price in a lower tolerance for inflation than the fed actually has, thereby causing financial conditions to tighten prematurely? is that a concern? thanks.  chair powell. so we’ve said we’d like to see inflation run moderately above 2 percent for some time. and we’ve resisted, basically, generally, the temptation to try to quantify that. part of that just is, talking about inflation is one thing; actually having inflation run above 2 percent is the real thing. so i—you know, over the years we’ve, we’ve talked about 2 percent inflation as a goal, but we haven’t achieved it. so i, i would say we’d like to, you know, perform. that’s what we’d really like to do, is to get inflation moderately above 2 percent. i don’t want to be too specific about what that means, because i think it’s hard to do that. and we haven’t done it yet. you know, when we’re actually above 2 percent, we can do that. i—look, i, i would say this. the fundamental change in, in our framework is that we, we’re not going to act preemptively based on forecasts for the most part. and we’re going to wait to see actual data. and i think it will take people time to, to adjust to that—and to adjust to that new practice. and the only way we can really build the credibility of that is by doing it. so that’s how i would think about that. michelle smith. thank you. matthew boesler. matthew boesler. hi, chair powell. this is matthew boesler with bloomberg news. so there’s a widespread presumption at this point that the u.s. will reach herd immunity sometime this year. and all along, you’ve said that the path of the economy is going to be determined by the course of the virus. i’m curious, based on the projections that you released today that show unemployment will still be above estimates of maximum employment through the end of next year and perhaps sometime into 2023, do you think policymakers need to be doing more here to sort of align the herd immunity and full employment timelines, if you will? thank you.  chair powell. so, on, on herd immunity, i, i’m really going to leave that question to the experts. we don’t control that. we’re not responsible for defining it. and we’ll, we’ll leave that whole discussion to the experts. i mean, we’re—what we’re focused on is, is the part that we control, which is the support that we provide to the economy. and there we’ve provided very clear guidance. and in the case of asset purchases, it’s at their current level until we make substantial further progress. there is an element of judgment in that, and we’ll, we’ll— therefore, we’ll supply clear communication well in advance of, of actually tapering, and we just went through, you know, the, the criteria for raising interest rates. they’re very specific. and, you know, we’re, we’re very much committed to having them fulfilled robustly. i, i would agree with you that the, the path of the virus continues to be very important. we, we have these, you know, new strains with—which, which can be quite virulent. and we’re not actually done yet. and i, i—we’re clearly on a good path with, with cases coming down, as i mentioned, but we’re not done. and i’d hate to see us take our eye off the ball before we actually finish the job. so that’s how i would look at that. matthew boesler. if i could just briefly follow up, how do you see sort of the disconnect in terms of an economy that is expected to be widely reopened this year but full employment taking longer to achieve? is it, is it the case that factors related to the virus will still be with us over the coming years? is that how to interpret the forecasts? chair powell. i think there’s some of that. sure, there’ll be some of that. there will still be some social distancing. people may be, for example, going into spaces that, that, you know, that involve close contact with others. some people will do that right away. others will hold back. and so i think there’ll—there’ll be some of that.  in addition, though, remember, there are—there are 10 million people—in the range of 10 million people who need to get back to work. and it’s going to take some time for that to happen. you know, it can—it can happen maybe, maybe more quickly than it has in the past, because it involves the reopening of a sector of the economy, as opposed to stimulating aggregate demand and waiting for that to produce job demand for workers. this could be a different sort of a process. and it could be quicker. we don’t know that. but it’s, it’s just a lot of people who have—who need to get back to work. and it’s not going to happen overnight. it would be—it’s going to take some time. no matter how well the economy performs, unemployment will take quite a time to go—to go down, and so will participation. so that’s all i can say. i think the faster the better; we’d love to see it come sooner rather than later. we’d welcome nothing more than that. but, realistically, given the numbers, it’s going to take some time. michelle smith. thank you, steve liesman. steve liesman. mr. chairman, thank you. i wonder if you could—kind of a three- parter here, but all related. would you comment on the current level of the 10-year yield and some other long rates out there, whether or not you think they would have a negative effect on the economy? and, if not, is there a level that would give you concern? and, finally, the third part: other central bankers have expressed concern about what’s happened to yields in their countries and even some taken action, but not you. could you give us your general idea or orientation towards the idea of, of coming into the market and affecting a particular tenor of the bond market? do—do you like that idea? do you not like it? is it at the top of your toolbox, or is it something that you think is at the bottom of the toolbox?  chair powell. sure. so we monitor a broad range of financial conditions, and we’re always attentive to market developments, of course. we’re still a long way from our goals, and it’s important that financial conditions do remain accommodative to support the achievement of those goals. and if you look at various indexes of financial conditions, what you’ll see is that they generally do show financial conditions overall to be highly accommodative. and that is appropriate. so that’s, that’s how we look at it. i would add, as i’ve said, i would be concerned by disorderly conditions in markets or by a persistent tightening of financial conditions that threaten the achievement of our goals. we think the stance of our—of monetary policy remains appropriate. our guidance on the federal funds rate and on asset purchases is providing strong support for the economy. and we’re committed to maintaining that patiently accommodative stance until the job is well and truly done. steve liesman. could, could you give us an idea of how you sort of feel about that tool, of being able to come into a particular part of the market and either operating—doing an operation twist or something like that? is that something you feel to be the top of your toolbox or something that you don’t really prefer? chair powell. you know, we—the tools we have are the tools we have. what i’m telling you is that the stance of monetary policy we have today, we believe, is appropriate. we think that our asset purchases in their current form—which is to say, you know, across the curve, $80 billion in treasuries, $40 billion in mortgage-backed securities on net—we think that that’s, that’s the right place for our asset purchases. now, we can—we can change them, of course, in, in a number of different dimensions should we deem that that’s appropriate. but, for now, we think that our policy stance on that is appropriate.  michelle smith. thank you. rachel siegel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. thanks very much for taking my question. you’ve spoken about the pandemic’s disproportionate toll on black americans, hispanic americans, asian americans, and other groups in the labor market. and i’m curious if you can speak to specific indicators that the fed will be using to measure job gains for groups that have persistently higher rates of unemployment compared to white americans. and, relatedly, since you’ve described vaccines as key to the economic recovery, is the fed concerned about lower vaccination rates in communities of color? and what barriers do you think exist there? thanks very much. chair powell. so, which measures. so we, we do monitor and communicate very regularly about different labor market—disparities in the labor market, let’s say. so the african american unemployment rate is substantially elevated, and so is the hispanic unemployment rate. so we look at those and we see those as, you know—it’s, it’s slack in the labor market. it’s, it’s sad to see, because those disparities had really come down to record lows since we started keeping the data that way. as recently as a year ago, february of last year, we had those, those disparities quite low. what happens in a downturn, though, is they move up at twice the speed of white unemployment. so we monitor those things. we—our tools, of course, affect unemployment generally, but we’re going to look at those as, as a form of slack in the labor market and hope that, you know, that there’s progress there. and, and this particular downturn, of course, was just a direct hit on, on a part of the economy that employs many minorities and lower-paid workers. the public-facing workers in the service industries in many cases don’t have a lot of financial assets, they’re not tremendously well paid, they might have other jobs, and things like that. so this was a direct hit on that part of  the economy. and it’s the slowest part of the economy to recover. so, you know, we’d like to see those people continue to get supported, you know, as we—as the broader economy recovers, which, which it’s very much doing now. in terms of disparate levels of vaccination, that’s—those are facts and unfortunate facts. they’re really not something we, we have within our policy toolkit to address. but it is—it is true, though, that the data we have suggests that there are—there are significant disparities between different ethnic groups and—you know, but that’s, that’s not for us. that’s for fiscal authorities and the government more generally to, to work on. michelle smith. thank you. jeanna smialek. jeanna smialek. hey, chair powell. thanks for taking our questions. i was wondering if you could talk a little bit about how you see the fiscal policy support that has come down the line affecting the economy’s potential in the longer term, just in the sense that you’ve talked a lot about the potential for labor market scarring and how that might weigh on our, sort of, future prospects. and i wonder whether you see that sort of working in reverse. you know, if we put people back into the labor market more quickly, does that improve our chances? chair powell. so i do think that fiscal policy overall will have really helped us to avoid much of the scarring that we were very, very concerned about at the beginning. and i think that’s just the size and the speed with which congress has delivered—you know, with the cares act and since then, has—is going to wind up very much accelerating the return to full employment. it’s going to make a huge difference in people’s lives. and it has already. as i mentioned in my remarks—opening remarks, the recovery has been faster than we expected. part of that just is, it’s very hard to predict, given we’ve never seen an event like this. but part of it is just the strength of the fiscal response, which i think will, will look good over the  years. longer term, you know, to, to really—that’s—the first part of it is about avoiding scarring, and i think we’ve not avoided all of the scarring, but we’ve probably avoided the worst cases there. and, and i hope we keep at it, and we will keep at it with our policies, of course, to do whatever we can to make sure that’s—that continues. longer term though, what it takes to drive productive capacity per capita or per hour worked, to raise living standards over time, is investment: investment in people’s skills and aptitudes, investment in plant and equipment, investment in software. it takes a lot of investment to, to support a more productive economy and raise living standards. and that’s—you know, that hasn’t been the principal focus with these measures—our measures, certainly. and we don’t have those tools. but what congress has been doing has mainly been replacing lost income and beginning to, you know, support people as the economy returns to normal. but there should be a focus on—a longer-term focus, i think, would be healthy on, on the investment front. michelle smith. thank you. james politi. james politi. thank you, chair powell. i wanted to ask a question about the euro zone. while the outlook for the u.s. economy has much improved, progress in the euro zone has been far less encouraging. and it’s showing signs of serious weakness due, due to the slower vaccination rollout and renewed lockdowns and restrictions. how worried are you about transatlantic economic divergence and the possibility that, that trouble in the euro zone and weakness in the euro zone could, could drag down the u.s. recovery as it did, in a way, in the aftermath of the financial crisis? chair powell. you’re right that the pace of the recovery is that we’re having diverging recoveries here, as we did after the last crisis. and in this case, as well as the other one, the u.s.’s recovery is, is leading the global recovery. and, you know, we conduct policy,  of course, here. our, our focus is on—our, you know—our, our objectives are domestic ones. it’s, it’s maximum employment and price stability here in the united states. we monitor developments abroad, and we know—because they know we know that they can—those can affect our outcomes. so i think u.s. demand—very strong u.s. demand, if, if—as the economy improves is going to support global activity as well over time. that, that’ll be through imports. and, you know, when the u.s. economy is strong, that strength tends to be—tends to support global, global activity as well. so that’s one thing. i don’t—i don’t worry in the near term. i mean, i’d love to see europe growing faster. i’d love to see the vaccine rollout going more smoothly. but i don’t worry too much about us in the near term, because we’re, we’re on a very good track. very strong fiscal support coming, now vaccination going quickly, and cases coming down. i think we’re—i think we’re in a good place. it’s all ahead of us, but the data should, should get stronger fairly quickly here and remain strong for some time here. michelle smith. thank you. hannah lang. hannah lang. hi, thanks so much for taking our questions. i wanted to ask if the fed is planning on extending the same restrictions on bank dividends and share repurchases— i’m sorry, share repurchases that are currently in place into the second quarter, and if you’re considering at all the scenario analysis and midcycle stress tests that were in place last year, this year. and, kind of, what would make you consider doing something like that again? chair powell. so we haven’t made a decision on that. we’re a couple weeks away from announcing that decision. i, i won’t foreshadow it here today. i will say, we’re going to continue our data-driven approach. you know that we restricted buybacks and dividends, so the firms are preserving capital. through 2020, the banks actually increased their level of capital  and their level of reserves. and the december stress tests showed that banks are strong and well capitalized under our hypothetical recessions that we—that we used in december, which were quite stringent. we’re right in the middle of our 2021 stress tests, and we’ll release those results before the end of june. and that layers, you know, very significant additional stress on top of the stress the banks have already absorbed over the past year, with the unemployment rate going to 11 percent and stock prices falling more than 50 percent. so—but all of that, you know, the results of the stress tests and the decision on distributions—all of that is to come fairly soon, as i mentioned. michelle smith. thank you. edward lawrence. edward lawrence. thanks, chair powell, for taking these questions. you laid out the standards to lift off. and back in june of 2020, you said, you know, you’re not even thinking about thinking about raising rates. but i see seven members seeing liftoff in 2023 and 4 next year. how, how much debate—and how can you characterize that conversation—has there been about moving off the lower bound earlier than signaled? chair powell. well, you know, it all depends. we’ve set out very clear criteria for liftoff, right, where we’ve said we want to see labor market conditions that are consistent with our estimates of, of maximum employment. and that doesn’t just mean unemployment, it means a much broader set of criteria. we want inflation at 2 percent, and not on a transitory basis. and we want inflation on track to be moderately—to run moderately above 2 percent for some time. those are the three conditions. everybody on the committee agrees to that, right? so it comes down to, what’s your projection for the economy? if you want to—if you want to—you know, people will have a range of, of assessments for how good the economy is  going to be. and, you know, we, we don’t—i would say that we’re in a relatively highly uncertain situation. if you look at the uncertainty, people, people on the committee broadly say that uncertainty about the forecast is, is very high compared to the normal level. we haven’t come out of a pandemic before. we haven’t had this kind of fiscal support before, totaling it all up. so you’re going to have different perspectives from committee participants about how fast growth will be, how fast the labor market will heal, or how fast—sorry, inflation will move up. and those things are going to dictate where people write down an estimate of liftoff. of course, this isn’t a decision to lift off now. we’ll make that decision then. but it’s an estimate based on—based on assumptions about growth. and it’s, it’s meant to be a tool to generally show the public how, how our objective function works, how we think about the future. it isn’t meant to actually pin down a time when we might or might not lift off. we—you know, we’re not going to make that decision for some time. the chances are that the economy in that time and place will be very different from the one we think it’ll be. so i—sometimes with the dots, i have to be sure to point out that they—they’re not a committee forecast. and you know this, but it’s—they’re not a committee forecast. it’s just compiling these projections, really, of individual people. we think it serves a useful purpose. it’s not meant to, to actually be a promise or even a prediction of when the committee will act. that will be very much dependent on economic outcomes, which are highly uncertain. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to brian cheung. brian cheung. hey there, chairman powell. i wanted to elaborate a little bit on your commentary about the fiscal stimulus. so it sounds like you, i guess, see the case for even maybe more investment, at least from congress, to support the more productive economy, as you answered to jeanna’s question. so we just had $1.9 trillion dollars in spending. so where do  you see the fiscal space right now? do you still, i guess, maybe see the country in a place right now where it wouldn’t be a concern if there were to be more spending at this time? chair powell. so, brian, it’s not up to us to decide what, what congress should spend money on or when. i was answering jeanna’s question, which really was, how do we assure lack of damage to—scarring, for example, or lack of damage to the productive capacity of the economy? and i think what’s happened so far has done a pretty good job of that. but, really, i wanted to make the longer-run point that if—to work on the productivity—on productivity over longer periods, that is—that is—comes down to a number of things. but one of those things is investment: investment in people, in their skills, education, aptitude, all of those things. i’m not in any way suggesting that that’s something congress should work on right now. or that, you know, that’s just not my—that’s not our job. i’m just saying, that, that is what fiscal policy can do that, really, monetary policy can’t do—is, is invest in the future productive capacity of the economy, raise potential growth. those things are completely tools that congress has. and, again, i wasn’t making a comment at all on the current fiscal setting. michelle smith. thank you. next to michael derby. michael derby. thank you for taking my question. i just wanted to get your—an updated view on your sense of your view on financial stability risks and whether or not you see any pockets of excess out in financial markets that concern you, either, you know, specifically to that, that area of the market or as in terms of, like, the threat that it could pose to—propose to the overall economy. chair powell. sure. so, as you know, financial stability for us is, is a framework. it’s not one thing. it’s not a particular market or a particular asset or anything like that. it’s a  framework that we, we have. we report on it semiannually, the board gets a report on it quarterly, and we monitor every day. and it has—it has four pillars, and those are four key vulnerabilities: asset valuations, debt owed by businesses and households, funding risk, and leverage among financial institutions. those four things. and i’ll just quickly touch on them. so if you look at asset valuations, you can say that by some measures, some asset valuations are elevated compared to history. i think that’s clear. in terms of households and businesses, households entered the, the crisis in very good shape by historical standards. leverage in the household sector had been just kind of gradually moving down and down and down since the—since the financial crisis. now, there was—there was some negative effects on that, people lost their jobs and that sort of thing, but they’ve also gotten a lot of support now. so the damage hasn’t been as, as bad as we thought. businesses, by the same token, had a high debt load coming in. and—but—and many saw their revenues decline. but there’s—they’ve done so much financing, and there’s a lot of cash on their balance sheet. so nothing in those two sectors really jumps out as really troubling. short term—i mentioned funding risk as the—as the last one. so we saw, again, in this crisis, breakdowns in parts of the short-term funding markets—came under a tremendous amount of stress. and they’ve been quiet since the spring. and, you know, we shut down our facilities and all of that. but we, we don’t—we don’t feel like we can let the moment pass without just saying again that we—that those—some aspects of the short-term funding markets and, more broadly, nonbank financial intermediation didn’t hold up so well under great stress—under tremendous stress. and we need to go back and look at that. so a very high priority for us as regulators and supervisors is going to be to go back—and this, this will involve all the other regulatory agencies; it does involve all of them as well—and see if we can strengthen those  things. so that’s, that’s a—sort of a broader, detailed look. michelle smith. thank you. michael mckee. michael mckee. mr. chairman, can you help me understand something about the, the sep and your forecasts? the inflation that you’re talking about for this year, you say, is “transitory.” then, by 2023, you’re back down to 2.1 percent. there’s no forecast for a rate increase for 2023. if you get to 3½ percent unemployment but inflation is only at 2 or 2.1 percent, are you willing to leave rates at zero going forward from there—or, roughly zero going forward from there? in other words, could we be in a japan-like situation where rates just stay low because inflation does? chair powell. well, again, i wouldn’t read too much into, into the, the march 2021 sep dot plot. remember what it is: it’s a compilation of individual projections by individual members. they’re all making different assessments. they, they have different forecasts, economic forecasts. some have more optimistic ones, some less optimistic. and they’re—also remember that the sep doesn’t actually include all the things that go into maximum employment. right? it’s, it’s only—it only includes unemployment. so i, i would just say, we’ve set out clear guidance. the—the message from the sep that i would like to leave with people is, we set out clear guidance. i mentioned what it was. it’s inflation up to—no, sorry, it’s, it’s labor market conditions consistent with our estimates of maximum employment—and that’s not just unemployment, it’s all the other indicators, but, overall, totaling up to maximum employment; it’s inflation at 2 percent, and not on a transient basis; and inflation on track to exceed 2 percent for—moderately for some time. those are the criteria. we’re committed to robustly implementing that guidance.  and that’s what this—that’s what this says. that’s really all it says. we’re going to wait until those requirements are met. and, again, you know, the, the state of the economy in two or three years is highly uncertain. and i wouldn’t want to focus too much on the exact timing of a potential rate increase that far into the future. michael mckee. if i could follow up, i’m just wondering—before 2019, i would say you were focused on the problems with having interest rates too low. now are you saying we’re willing to live with it until we reach these goals even if you get—meet your goal on maximum employment? chair powell. so what i would say is, we’re committed to giving the economy the support that it needs to return as quickly as possible to a state of maximum employment and price stability. and, you know, to the extent having rates low and support for monetary policy broadly, to the extent that raises other questions, we think it’s absolutely essential to maintain the strength and stability of the—of the broader financial system and to carefully monitor financial stability questions if that’s what you’re getting at. you know, we, we do that. we will—we monitor them very carefully. i, i would point out that, over the long expansion—the longest in u.s. history, 10 years and 8 months—rates were very low for—they were at zero for, you know, 7 years and then—and then never got above, you know, 2.4 percent, roughly. during that, we didn’t see, actually, excess buildup of debt. we didn’t see asset prices form into bubbles that would threaten the progress of the economy. we didn’t see the things you—we didn’t see a housing bubble. you know, the things that have tended to really hurt an economy and have in recent history hurt the u.s., we didn’t see them build up despite very low rates. part of that just is that you’re in a low- rate environment, you’re in a much lower rate environment, and the connection between low  rates and the kind of financial instability issues is just not as tight as people think it is. that’s not to say we ignore it. we don’t ignore it. we, we watch it very carefully. and we don’t think—we think there is a connection. we say there is, but it’s not quite so clear. we actually monitor financial conditions very, very broadly and carefully. and we didn’t do that before the global financial crisis 12 years ago. now we do. and we’ve also, you know, put a lot of time and effort into strengthening the large financial institutions that form the core of our financial system—are much stronger, much more resilient. that’s true of the banks. i think it’s true of the ccps. we want it to be true of, of other nonbank financial intermediation, markets, and, and institutions. so i think that’s, that’s—you know, monetary policy should be, to me, for, for achieving our macroeconomic aims. financial regulatory policy and supervision should be for strengthening the financial system so that it is strong and robust and can withstand the kinds of things that it couldn’t, frankly—and we learned that in 2008, ’09, ’10. this time around, the regulated part of the financial system held up very well. we, we found some other areas that need strengthening, and that’s what we’re working on now. michelle smith. thank you. anneken, cnn. anneken tappe. thanks for taking my question. chairman powell, could you talk to us a little bit about the relationship between the persistent pandemic unemployment and the expected increase in, in inflation? does the former offset the latter to some degree? chair powell. i’m sorry, could you repeat that? you broke up there for a second. anneken tappe. oh, no, i was hoping that wouldn’t happen. can you hear me now? chair powell. yes, yes.  anneken tappe. okay, great. i was asking if you could talk to us a little bit about the relationship between the persistent pandemic unemployment and the expected increase in inflation. i’m wondering whether the former offsets the latter and to which degree you guys are monitoring this. chair powell. you’re asking about the relationship between unemployment and inflation? is that—is that the question? anneken tappe. yes, exactly. chair powell. okay. anneken tappe. if they offset each other—the persistent pandemic unemployment. chair powell. yes, i think i’m hearing you correctly. so i would say a couple things. there was a time when there was a tight connection between unemployment and inflation. that time is long gone. we had extremely low unemployment in, in—not extremely low. we had low unemployment in 2018 and ’19 and the beginning of ’20 without having troubling inflation at all. we were at 3.5 percent. we were bouncing around with unemployment 3.5 percent to 4 percent. and it wasn’t just unemployment. participation was high, wages were moving up. it was a very healthy thing. and we didn’t see price inflation move up. there is a relationship between wage inflation and unemployment. but that has not— what, what happens is that when wages move up because unemployment is low, companies have been absorbing that increase into their margins rather than raising prices. and that seems to be a feature of late-cycle behavior. so we’re, we’re not—when, when we—when we seek to achieve low unemployment, high levels of employment, which is our mandate, you know, we think we have the freedom to do that based on the data without worrying too much about inflation.  michelle smith. thank you. going to greg robb. greg robb. hi. thanks for taking my question. i wanted to follow up a little bit. i, i understand what you’re saying about the dot plot and, and the message you’re trying to send with the dot plot. but does the same apply for the taper tantrum? you’ve said that it’s going to take “some time” to get some fundamental progress on your goals, but it seems like “some time” could now be any time. chair powell. so we’ve said “substantial further progress.” now, if you go back, october, november—sorry, november, december, and january, progress in the labor market slowed very sharply. so you had an average of 29,000 jobs per month. if you go back and look at the, the level of job creation before that, it was very, very high—very high. so we weren’t making any progress on the labor market from november through january. february, we saw a nice—a nice pickup, a good jobs report—379,465 private sector. so that’s good. it can go so much higher, though. and, and, you know, it would be nice to see—to really make faster progress that’s different from substantial progress, we’d like to see it be, be higher than that. and i think it will be. that’s—the expectation is, you’ll see now, i think, really strong job creation return—not as high as it was in the very early days of the recovery, the reopening of the economy, but, nonetheless, very strong. okay. so what, what i’m saying is, to achieve substantial progress from where we are, having had three months of, of very little progress, is going to take some time. and it’s—we don’t want to get into—i don’t want to get into trying to put a pin on the calendar someplace, because it’s going to be data dependent. when we see—when we see ourselves on track to make substantial further progress, we’re going to—we’re going to say so. we understand fully that  that test is one that involves judgment. if you remember, during the global financial crisis recovery, we said quantitative easing, number three, was—the test was a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. well, what does that mean? well, it means a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. it meant we would communicate when we thought we had that. this is just like that, in a way. what we’re saying is, substantial further progress toward our goals. we’ll tell people when we think—until we—until we say—until we give a signal, you can assume we’re not there yet. and as we approach it, well in advance—well in advance—we will give a signal that, yes, we’re on a path to, to possibly achieve that, to consider tapering. so that’s, that’s how we’re planning to handle it. it’s not different, really, from, from qe3. and i think we’ve learned—what we’ve learned from the experience of these last dozen years is to communicate very carefully, very clearly, well in advance, and then follow through with, with your communications. in this case, it’s, it’s an outcome-based set of guidance, as our rate guidance is, and it’s going to depend on the progress of the economy. that’s why it’s not appropriate to start pointing at dates yet. greg robb. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. don lee, l.a. times. don lee. hi, chair powell. as you know, households, households are sitting on a lot of excess savings. and i wonder if, combined with that, you have an unleashing of, you know, pent-up demand. how much do you think that would affect—that would affect inflation? and would you expect that to be transitory? chair powell. we, you know, we and everyone who’s forecasting these—what, what we’re all doing is, we are looking at the—at the amount of savings. we’re looking at—you  know, we have reasonably good data on that. and we’re looking at the government transfers that’ll be made as part of the various laws. and we’re trying to make an assessment on what will be the tendency of people to spend that money, the marginal propensity to consume. and from that, you can develop an estimate of the impact on spending, on growth, on hiring, and, ultimately, on inflation. so that’s, that’s what we’re all doing. and we have, you know, we have—we can look at history, and we can make estimates, and those are all very transparent and public. and you can compare one to the other. and, of course, we’ve all—we’ve all done that. and i think we’ve made very conservative assumptions and sensible mainstream assumptions at each step of that process. and what, what it comes down to is what i said before, which is, there very likely will be a step-up in inflation as march and april of last year drop out of the 12-month window, because they were very low inflation numbers. that’s a—that’ll be a fairly significant pop in inflation. it’ll wear off quickly, though, because it—just the way the numbers are calculated. past that, as the economy reopens, people will start spending more, and then, you know, you can only go out to dinner once per night, but a lot of people can go out to dinner. and so— and they’re not doing that now. they’re not going to restaurants, not going to theaters. that part of the economy—and travel and hotels—that part of the economy is, is really not functioning at, at full capacity, right? but as that happens, people can start to spend. it’s also—wouldn’t be surprising if—and you’re seeing this now, particularly in the goods economy—there’ll be bottlenecks. they won’t be—they won’t be able to service all of the demand maybe, maybe for a period. so those things could lead to—and we’ve, we’ve modeled that. other people have too. we’ve—and what we see is relatively modest increases in inflation. so—but those are not permanent things.  you know, what’ll, what’ll happen is—the supply side—the supply side in the united states is very dynamic. people start businesses, they, they reopen restaurants, you know, the airlines are, will be flying again, all of those things will happen. and so it’ll turn out to be a one—a one-time sort of bulge in, in prices, but it won’t change inflation going forward, because inflation expectations are strongly anchored around 2 percent. we know that inflation dynamics do evolve over time. and there was a time when, when inflation went up, it would stay up. and, and that time is not now. that hasn’t been the case for some decades. and we think it won’t—it won’t—we won’t suddenly change to another regime. these things tend to change over time. and they tend to—tend to change when the central bank doesn’t understand that having inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent is the key to it all. the, the—having them anchored at 2 percent is what gives us the ability to push hard when the economy’s really weak. if we saw inflation expectations moving materially above 2 percent, of course, we would conduct policy in a way that would, would make sure that that didn’t happen. we’re committed to having inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent, not materially above or below 2 percent. so that’s—i think if you—if you look at the savings, look at all of that, model it, that’s, that’s kind of what comes out of our assessment. there are different possibilities. i think it’s, it’s a relatively unusual—very unusual situation to have all these savings and this, this amount of fiscal support and monetary policy support. nonetheless, that, that is our most likely case. and you know, as the—as the data come in and the economy performs, we’ll of course adjust. our outcome-based guidance will immediately adapt, we think, to meet whatever the actual path of the economy is. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to scott horsley for the last question.  scott horsley. thanks, chairman powell. my question is about those supply chain bottlenecks, especially on the goods side. are they getting better, or are they getting worse? we saw they were sort of a drag on the industrial production numbers we—that came out yesterday. and what do you expect them to do to prices in, in—just in the short run? chair powell. you know, i have to say, i think it’s impossible to say, frankly, with any confidence, but i, i would expect it’s very possible—let’s put it that way—that you will see bottlenecks emerge and then clear over time. and you’ll probably see that over a period of time, because, you know, really, the, the strong data are ahead of us. you know, you’re, you’re—right now the, the checks are going out just, just now. and that’ll, that’ll add to spending. covid cases are coming down. vaccination is moving, now, quickly. you know, the, the really strong economic data is coming. it should be coming, assuming we stay on this track. and that’s when you’ll really know where, where the bottlenecks are. but you can see, though, that they’re not—these are not permanent. it’s not like the supply side will be unable to adapt to these things. it will—the market will clear. it just may take some time. and, and some of the answer to that may be price. in many cases, it won’t be price. you’ll see that people are reluctant to raise prices. you know, it’s a little bit the story about, you know, the wage—the wage phillips curve does show that as unemployment goes down, wages move up. but companies choose not to try to, to pass that, that price increase along to their customers. so you’ll see a lot of that here too, i think. anyway, we’ll, we’ll see. but that’s, that’s my basic, basic sense. thank you very much. michelle smith. thank you.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 2 page 2 federal open market committee  reserve bank operations and payment systems, board of governors brent bundick, research and policy advisor, federal reserve bank of kansas city jennifer gallagher, special assistant to the board, division of board members, board of governors michael koslow,2 markets officer, federal reserve bank of new york brian j. bonis, michiel de pooter, and zeynep senyuz,2 assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board of governors fernando m. martin, research officer, federal reserve bank of st. louis section chief, division of alyssa g. monetary affairs, board of governors; penelope a. beattie,2 section chief, office of the secretary, board of governors anderson,2 mark a. carlson, senior economic project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors david h. small, project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors michele cavallo, sebastian infante, and ander perezorive, principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board of governors randall a. williams, lead information manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors anthony sarver,2 senior financial institution policy analyst, division of monetary affairs, board of governors ellen j. bromagen, first vice president, federal reserve bank of chicago michael dotsey, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of philadelphia anne baum, edward s. knotek ii, giovanni olivei, paula tkac, and mark l.j. wright, senior vice presidents, federal reserve banks of new york, cleveland, boston, atlanta, and minneapolis, respectively kathryn b. chen2 and jonathan p. mccarthy, vice presidents, federal reserve bank of new york brett rose,2 assistant vice president, federal reserve bank of new york anthony murphy, senior economic policy advisor, federal reserve bank of dallas william g. o’boyle,2 policy and markets manager, federal reserve bank of new york michael junho lee,2 economist, federal reserve bank of new york action to adopt changes to the committee’s rules regarding availability of information by unanimous vote, the committee approved a final rule that revises its rules regarding availability of information, which are the committee’s freedom of information act (foia) rules. the revised foia rules, which include a range of minor and technical updates, will become effective 30 days after the forthcoming publication of the final rule in the federal register. developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments. in the united states, the trend toward higher longer-term yields observed in recent months accelerated over the intermeeting period, and far-forward real rates based on treasury inflationprotected securities (tips) rose considerably. market participants highlighted an improving economic outlook, bolstered by passage of the american rescue plan (arp) and progress on vaccinations, as underlying the increase in yields. model- and survey-based estimates suggested that a significant portion of the increase in yields was associated with an increase in term premiums. higher term premiums could reflect the outlook for more expansive fiscal policy and an associated upward revision in the expected path for treasury debt outstanding. increased uncertainty over the outlook for longer-term interest rates as well as technical factors may also have contributed to the rise in term premiums. the treasury market functioned well over most of the period, although measures of market liquidity deteriorated somewhat toward the end of february. conditions gradually improved, although some measures of market liquidity had not fully returned to earlier levels. minutes of the meeting of march 16–17, 2021 page 3  rates implied by interest rate futures maturing over the next several years rose notably over the intermeeting period, reportedly reflecting a reassessment by market participants of the expected path of the target range for the federal funds rate. since the january meeting, the date of the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate implied by a straight read of market pricing moved notably earlier to the first quarter of 2023, and the implied target rate at the end of 2023 rose around 50 basis points. however, responses to the open market desk surveys suggested more modest changes to policy rate expectations. the probability-weighted mean survey expectation for the target rate at the end of 2023 rose only around 5 basis points. expectations for economic conditions at the time of the first increase in the target range, as measured by the desk surveys, appeared to remain broadly consistent with the committee’s policy framework and forward guidance. expectations from the desk surveys for the path of asset purchases were little changed. contacts noted that these expectations have been held steady by policymaker communications emphasizing both the need to see realized progress toward the committee’s goals and the intent to communicate well in advance of the time when progress could be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of purchases. alongside the rise in u.s. yields, broad u.s. equity price indexes increased moderately, with the largest gains in cyclically sensitive sectors. the rise in u.s. yields was also accompanied by increases in sovereign yields in other advanced economies. some central banks responded to these yield increases with adjustments to operations; others suggested that the rising yields reflected improvements in the outlook. the deputy manager discussed the evolution of the federal reserve’s balance sheet and related developments in money markets. reserve balances rose more than $400 billion, on net, over the intermeeting period to $3.7 trillion, while treasury bills outstanding decreased more than $200 billion. against this backdrop, the effective federal funds rate softened modestly, while repurchase agreement (repo) rates declined to a greater extent. moreover, market participants projected that reserves would grow at a historically rapid pace in coming months, reflecting continued expansion of the federal reserve’s balance sheet along with a projected drawdown in the balances maintained in the treasury general account. market contacts suggested that continued rapid expansion of reserves could put further downward pressure on money market rates. the deputy manager noted that the earliest and most pronounced pressure was likely to be observed in overnight secured financing markets, and there could be increasing usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility. in light of the potential for expanded use of the on rrp facility, the staff had conducted a review to ensure that the terms of the facility and its counterparty base were well positioned to continue to support effective policy implementation. by offering a broad range of money market lenders an outside investment option, the on rrp facility enhances lenders’ bargaining power in negotiating rates on short-term private investments and thus helps establish a floor on overnight money market rates. the facility can also alleviate downward pressure on overnight rates associated with reserve growth by broadening the range of liabilities that support the federal reserve’s balance sheet expansion. the review recommended raising the on rrp per-counterparty limit from $30 billion to $80 billion. the $30 billion limit had been established a number of years ago, and the amount of credit intermediated through money markets had grown substantially since then. the increase in the limit to $80 billion would restore the capacity of the facility relative to the aggregate size of money fund counterparties to roughly the level in place when the facility was established. the staff would also monitor money market conditions on an ongoing basis to assess whether any additional adjustments were needed to the on rrp facility terms. in addition to changes to the on rrp parameters, the deputy manager also noted that the federal reserve could consider adjusting its administered rates if undue downward pressure on overnight rates emerged. responses to the desk surveys indicated that many market participants anticipated adjustments to the interest on excess reserves rate and the on rrp rate at or before the june meeting. finally, in light of more normal conditions in agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) markets, the desk planned to conduct agency cmbs operations as needed to sustain smooth market functioning but would cease regularly scheduled cmbs operations. in their discussion following the desk briefings, participants noted that the on rrp facility had been very effective in establishing a firm floor for the federal funds rate and supporting monetary policy implementation. participants commented that the facility would continue to be an important part of the monetary policy implementation framework going forward, particularly in page 4 federal open market committee  coming months with reserve levels projected to rise rapidly. participants broadly supported the proposed increase in the counterparty limit, and a few participants also noted that they would support removing the limit altogether. a few participants suggested that some type of dynamic or differential limit could be considered in the future to enable the on rrp facility to adapt more readily to market developments. a few participants noted that the concerns at the time the facility was established about possible adverse effects of the on rrp facility on financial stability and the structure of money markets had not materialized. indeed, over the spring of 2020, the facility played an important role in helping stabilize money market conditions. in light of the potential for greater use of the on rrp facility going forward in connection with the expansion of the federal reserve’s balance sheet and associated downward pressure on overnight rates, a couple of participants noted that it might be useful to review lessons learned regarding the on rrp facility since its inception. following the discussion, the chair noted the potential for downward pressure on money market rates and suggested that, should undue downward pressure on overnight rates emerge, it might be appropriate to implement adjustments to administered rates at upcoming meetings or even between meetings to support effective policy implementation and ensure that the federal funds rate remains well within the target range. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. no intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the covid-19 pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activity in the united states and abroad. the information available at the time of the march 16–17 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) was expanding in the first quarter of 2021 at a pace that was faster than in the fourth quarter of last year, although the level of real gdp had likely not yet returned to the level seen before the onset of the pandemic. labor market conditions improved in january and february, but employment was still well below its level at the start of 2020. consumer price inflation through january—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—remained well below 2 percent. total nonfarm payroll employment increased solidly over january and february after softening at the end of last year. as of february, payroll employment had retraced somewhat more than half of the losses seen since the onset of the pandemic. the unemployment rate fell to 6.2 percent in february. the unemployment rates for hispanics and asians declined, on balance, over january and february, while the unemployment rate for african americans was unchanged on net; the rates for both african americans and hispanics remained well above the national average. even though the labor force participation rate edged down, the employment-to-population ratio moved up somewhat over january and february; both measures remained below their pre-pandemic levels. initial claims for unemployment insurance in early march were at their lowest level since november of last year. weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by federal reserve board staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp indicated that the four-week average increase in private employment at the end of february was about the same as it had been in the middle of the month, when the bureau of labor statistics collects payroll employment data. average hourly earnings for all employees rose 5.3 percent over the 12 months ending in february, and labor compensation per hour in the business sector increased 6.6 percent over the four quarters of 2020. the gains in both these measures, however, continued to be dominated by changes in the composition of the workforce. in particular, the concentration of job losses among lower-wage workers since early last year had resulted in outsized increases in average hourly earnings and compensation per hour that were not indicative of tight labor market conditions. by contrast, the employment cost index of total hourly compensation in the private sector rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months of last year, and a staff estimate of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the adp data was 3.2 percent in january. these measures are likely to have been less affected by changes in workforce composition, and they were rising more slowly than their pre-pandemic pace. total pce price inflation was 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending in january and continued to be held down by slack in resource utilization. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, also was 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending in january, while the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 1.7 percent in january. in february, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 1.7 percent, while core cpi inflation was 1.3 percent over the same period. the latest readings on survey-based minutes of the meeting of march 16–17, 2021 page 5  measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on balance. in early march, the university of michigan surveys of consumers preliminary measure for the next 5 to 10 years was the same as in the previous two months, while in february, the 3-year-ahead measure of inflation expectations produced by the federal reserve bank of new york was essentially unchanged from its january level. the survey of professional forecasters measure of pce price inflation over the next 10 years edged up in the first quarter, returning to its prepandemic level. a staff index of common inflation expectations, which summarizes the co-movement of a wide variety of inflation expectations measures, was at about the same level in the fourth quarter of last year as in the third quarter. consumer spending appeared to be increasing in the first quarter at a pace considerably faster, on balance, than in the fourth quarter of last year. real pce expanded strongly in january after declining over the preceding two months, with spending likely boosted by federal stimulus payments sent out in early january. the components of the nominal retail sales data used by the bureau of economic analysis to estimate pce pointed to a step-down in spending in february, but revised data for the previous month suggested an even stronger gain in january. spending in march was expected to be boosted by additional federal stimulus payments from the arp, which started to be distributed around the middle of the month. in addition, the personal saving rate jumped to an even higher level in january, and ongoing gains in labor earnings along with further fiscal support pointed to additional increases in accumulated household savings. moreover, the preliminary reading of consumer sentiment from the michigan survey moved up notably in early march to its highest level over the past year, reportedly reflecting the growing number of vaccinations and the enactment of the arp, although consumer sentiment remained below its levels from just before the onset of the pandemic. construction of single-family homes and home sales remained well above their pre-pandemic levels. however, the incoming data for this sector were mixed. starts of single-family homes moved down notably over january and february, in part likely reflecting severe winter weather in february. starts of multifamily units also fell in february but by less than the strong increase seen in january. construction permits for single-family homes moved down, on net, over january and february, pointing to some slowing in construction in coming months. sales of both new and existing homes increased further in january, and home prices continued to rise briskly. business investment in equipment and intangibles was continuing to increase in the first quarter after rising appreciably in the fourth quarter of last year. nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft expanded strongly in january, and rising orders for these goods pointed to further gains in business equipment spending in coming months. business investment in the drilling and mining sector appeared to be increasing further after turning up sharply in the fourth quarter, as crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of drilling investment—continued to rise through early march with oil prices moving higher. nominal nonresidential construction spending rose somewhat in january, but investment in nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector looked to remain weak in the current quarter after declining further in the fourth quarter, reflecting continued hesitation by businesses to commit to building projects with lengthy times to completion and uncertain future returns. industrial production continued to rise solidly in january but then fell markedly in february, largely reflecting declines in manufacturing and mining sector output caused by severe winter weather in the south central region of the country in the middle of that month. along with the severe weather, a cutback in the production of motor vehicles and parts also reflected a global shortage of semiconductors. new orders indexes in national and regional manufacturing surveys pointed toward solid increases in factory output in the coming months, although reports of shortages in materials and labor, as well as bottlenecks in transportation, signaled some potential restraints on the pace of the manufacturing recovery. total real government purchases appeared to be rising in the first quarter after edging down in the fourth quarter. although data through february indicated that defense spending was moving down, a likely bounceback in nondefense spending was expected to lift total federal purchases. state and local government purchases looked to be increasing, as the payrolls of these governments expanded, on net, over january and february, and nominal state and local construction spending increased solidly in january. moreover, additional federal support for state and local governments included in the arp, along with an improved outlook for state and local tax revenues, pointed to further notable increases in state and local purchases. data for december and january showed a narrower nominal u.s. international trade deficit than in november. both imports and exports continued to rebound page 6 federal open market committee  from their collapse in the first half of last year. goods imports in january were much higher than a year earlier, with continued gains in most categories. nominal goods exports in january nearly recovered to their level from a year earlier, with particular strength in exports of capital goods and industrial supplies. services imports and exports remained depressed, weighed down by the continued suspension of most international travel. recent data pointed to a slowdown in economic activity across foreign economies around the turn of the year, as tight social-distancing restrictions were imposed to rein in a new wave of covid-19 infections in various parts of the world, most notably in europe and latin america. even so, economies appeared to be better adapted to operating under restrictions than during previous waves of infections. manufacturing activity continued to generally outperform activity in the services sector, and manufactured exports from china and some other asian economies remained strong, especially to the united states. inflation rebounded in many foreign economies, reflecting rising energy prices and other temporary factors. however, underlying inflationary pressures remained subdued. staff review of the financial situation investors appeared to have become more optimistic about the economic outlook over the intermeeting period against the backdrop of progress on covid-19 vaccinations, signs of stronger domestic spending, and additional fiscal stimulus. the nominal treasury yield curve steepened markedly, largely because of increases in longer-term real yields, although measures of inflation compensation also increased further. despite the spikes in equity market volatility early in the intermeeting period, spurred by heavy trading concentrated in a few specific stocks and subsequent concerns over the rapid rise in longer-term interest rates, broad equity price indexes rose on net. consistent with the stronger outlook, spreads on high-yield corporate bonds narrowed. financing conditions for businesses with access to capital markets and households with high credit scores remained broadly accommodative, but conditions stayed tight for other borrowers. the treasury yield curve steepened over the intermeeting period, with 5- and 10-year yields rising markedly. measures of inflation compensation increased moderately, on net, continuing the trend observed over recent months. however, in contrast to recent months, most of the recent increase in longer-term treasury yields was accounted for by higher tips-implied real yields. market participants attributed the increases in longer-term yields in part to increased investor optimism about the economic outlook and expectations of higher treasury debt issuance. on february 25, yields rose especially sharply. market depth became thin, and bid-ask spreads widened, but treasury market liquidity gradually recovered over the following days. swaption-implied volatilities of longer-term interest rates rose notably. the expected path for the federal funds rate over the next few years, as implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes, rose substantially since the previous fomc meeting and moved above 25 basis points in the first quarter of 2023, about three quarters sooner than expected at the time of the january meeting. broad stock price indexes increased, on net, over the intermeeting period, consistent with increased investor optimism about the economic outlook and the enactment of the arp. stocks in cyclically sensitive industries such as energy, banking, and small caps recorded sizable gains, while other sectors experienced mixed performance. one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—fluctuated over a wide range during the intermeeting period but moved lower on balance. spreads of corporate bond yields over comparablematurity treasury yields were roughly unchanged on investment-grade corporate bonds but narrowed for speculative-grade bonds. conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period. spreads on commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit across different tenors were little changed and remained near historically low levels. assets under management (aum) of government money market funds (mmfs) rose over the intermeeting period, whereas aum of prime mmfs declined somewhat. the effective federal funds rate and the secured overnight financing rate averaged 7 basis points and 3 basis points, respectively, over the intermeeting period, decreasing somewhat relative to the previous intermeeting period average amid a net decrease in treasury bill issuance and rising reserves. there continued to be no participation in the federal reserve’s repo operations, but participation in the federal reserve’s on rrp increased a little. amid stable market conditions, there was no take-up in the money market mutual fund liquidity facility or the commercial paper funding facility. improved u.s. economic growth prospects and optimism about the eventual lifting of social-distancing and related restrictions globally were major drivers of asset prices abroad, spurring sizable increases in sovereign minutes of the meeting of march 16–17, 2021 page 7  yields in advanced foreign economies. in response to rising yields, the reserve bank of australia increased its bond purchases, and the european central bank indicated it would increase the pace of its bond purchases going forward. the broad dollar index rose modestly, with more notable appreciation against currencies of emerging market economies (emes). eme sovereign spreads edged up, and flows into eme bond funds fell back later in the period amid the rise in yields in advanced economies. however, flows into dedicated eme equity funds remained strong. overall, foreign equity indexes increased slightly in most major markets. financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses in capital markets remained broadly accommodative over the intermeeting period, supported by low interest rates and high equity valuations. gross and net corporate bond issuances were solid in january and february. gross issuance of leveraged loans was strong in january, driven mainly by refinancing activity, as primary-market spreads compressed notably since the end of last year in response to strong investor demand for such loans. equity raised through traditional initial public offerings and seasoned equity offerings continued to be strong in january and february, and initial equity offerings by special purpose acquisition companies remained exceptionally high. commercial and industrial loans outstanding on banks’ balance sheets continued to decline through february as loan paydowns persisted and demand for new bank credit reportedly remained subdued. corporate earnings continued to recover while the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations improved further. corporate bond defaults declined in december and january and reached levels substantially below their 2019 average. in addition, the volume of nonfinancial corporate credit rating upgrades modestly outpaced downgrades over the first two months of 2021. market indicators of future default expectations moved lower. financing conditions for small businesses remained tight. demand for loans remained depressed—and loan originations fell in december last year to about the same level seen in august—after the spike in lending associated with the first round of the paycheck protection program. long-term delinquencies remained elevated relative to recent years but were at levels significantly below those experienced during the global financial crisis. municipal market financing conditions stayed accommodative over the intermeeting period. for commercial real estate (cre) financed through capital markets, financing conditions remained accommodative over the intermeeting period. agency cmbs spreads narrowed further with strong issuance in december and january. spreads on non-agency cmbs also tightened, although triple-b spreads stayed at elevated levels compared with pre-pandemic levels. issuance of non-agency cmbs remained weak relative to prepandemic levels. cre loan growth at banks was weak, on net, through february, consistent with tight bank lending standards. financing conditions in the residential mortgage market tightened somewhat over the intermeeting period but remained accommodative for stronger borrowers. mortgage rates for most borrowers increased but stayed near historically low levels, supporting elevated refinance and purchase activity through january. credit was broadly available to higher-score borrowers meeting standard conforming loan criteria but tightened further for borrowers with lower credit scores. the share of mortgages in forbearance was unchanged. financing conditions in consumer credit markets remained generally accommodative for borrowers with strong credit scores but were still tight for those with nonprime scores. auto loan balances continued to grow in january, while credit card balances declined. interest rates on new credit card offers to borrowers with prime credit scores continued to trend down, on net, through december. in contrast, offer rates to nonprime borrowers rose further. conditions in the asset-backed securities market were stable during the intermeeting period. staff economic outlook the u.s. economic projection prepared by the staff for the march fomc meeting was considerably stronger than the january forecast. real gdp growth appeared to be picking up at the beginning of this year by more than the staff had expected, likely reflecting both a faster-than-anticipated easing in social distancing and a more rapid response by households to the fiscal support package enacted in late december. moreover, the size of the arp enacted in march was considerably larger than what the staff had assumed in the january projection. all told, real gdp growth was projected to be substantial this year and the unemployment rate was forecast to decline markedly, as the staff’s projection also continued to anticipate that widespread vaccination would allow for further easing in social distancing this year. real gdp growth was expected to step down in 2022 and 2023 but still outpace that of potential over this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels, as monetary policy was assumed to remain highly accommodative. page 8 federal open market committee  incoming data on inflation were a little above what the staff had expected. the 12-month changes in total and core pce prices were expected to transitorily move above 2 percent in coming months, as the low inflation readings from the spring of last year dropped out of the calculation window. in addition, inflation was forecast to be temporarily boosted this year by the expected emergence of some production bottlenecks and supply constraints. following the transitory increase this year, inflation was projected to run a bit below 2 percent next year and then to reach 2 percent by 2023, reflecting tight resource utilization in product and labor markets. the staff continued to see the uncertainty surrounding the outlook as elevated. moreover, the uncertain course of the pandemic, particularly the emergence of morecontagious strains of the coronavirus in the united states and elsewhere, was still viewed as tilting the risks to the economic outlook to the downside. however, given the resilience of the economy in the face of the earlier surge in new covid-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths and the magnitude of fiscal support enacted, the downside risks to the economic outlook were seen as smaller than for the previous projection. the staff viewed the risks of upside inflationary pressures as having increased since the previous forecast and now saw the risks to the inflation projection as balanced. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2021 through 2023 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. in their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. following a moderation in the pace of the recovery, indicators of economic activity and employment had turned up recently, although the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remained weak. inflation continued to run below 2 percent. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants noted that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations, and that the ongoing public health crisis would continue to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation and posed considerable risks to the economic outlook. participants observed that the pace of the economic recovery had picked up recently and that the economy continued to show resilience in the face of the pandemic. they noted encouraging developments regarding the pandemic, including significant declines in the number of new cases, hospitalizations, and deaths over the intermeeting period as well as a pickup in the pace of vaccinations. in light of these developments as well as the extent of the recent fiscal policy support, participants significantly revised up their projections for real gdp growth this year compared with the projections they submitted last december. they noted, however, that economic activity and employment were currently well below levels consistent with maximum employment. participants observed that the economic downturn had not fallen equally on all americans and that lowerincome and black and hispanic households had been disproportionately affected by the pandemic. a number of participants stressed that recently enacted fiscal support would help address some of the hardships faced by these groups and that monetary policy would also help by promoting the economy’s return to the committee’s goals of broad-based and inclusive maximum employment and price stability. participants observed that household spending had risen notably so far this year and anticipated that further gains in consumer spending would contribute significantly to the economic recovery. while household spending on services that typically require close personal contact remained weak, participants expected spending on these services would improve as vaccinations became more widespread, social-distancing measures were relaxed, and the public became less wary of close personal interactions. participants anticipated consumer spending would be bolstered by the recently enacted fiscal stimulus packages as well as by accommodative monetary policy. many participants also pointed to the elevated level of household savings and judged that the release of pentup demand could boost consumption growth further as social distancing waned. participants also observed that residential construction continued to be solid and home minutes of the meeting of march 16–17, 2021 page 9  sales remained robust in part because of low interest rates. low inventory was viewed as an important factor supporting strong gains in housing prices. with respect to the business sector, participants observed that business equipment investment had continued to increase and that readings on new orders and shipments of capital goods remained strong. while some district contacts continued to report that firms in industries such as cre or leisure, travel, and hospitality were struggling from pandemic-related social distancing, other district contacts reported that activity in these industries had started to improve. participants noted that surveys of business activity had picked up recently and that many district contacts were growing increasingly optimistic about business prospects given ongoing progress on vaccinations. participants also discussed reports of shortages in materials, key intermediate inputs, and labor as well as bottlenecks in shipping. a few participants noted that higher crop prices were continuing to boost income in the agricultural sector. several participants judged that the support provided by the arp could improve the financial positions of small firms that had been adversely affected by the pandemic. participants observed that labor market conditions had improved recently, as payroll employment registered strong gains in february and the unemployment rate fell to 6.2 percent. even so, payroll employment was about 9.5 million jobs below its pre-pandemic level, and labor market conditions for those in the most disadvantaged communities were viewed as lagging behind those of other households. moreover, participants noted that employment in the leisure and hospitality sector was still down substantially from its pre-pandemic level despite a sharp rebound in february. participants generally expected strong job gains to continue over coming months and into the medium term, supported by accommodative fiscal and monetary policies as well as by continued progress on vaccinations, further reopening of sectors most affected by the pandemic, and the associated recovery in economic activity. however, participants noted that the economy was far from achieving the committee’s broad-based and inclusive goal of maximum employment. some participants commented that labor force participation continued to be held down by workers’ health concerns and additional childcare responsibilities associated with virtual schooling and that the pace of recovery in the labor market would depend importantly on how rapidly those affected by these issues could rejoin the labor force. several participants noted that the speed of the labor market recovery also depended on factors such as the movement of workers across industries and occupations in a restructuring economy or the effects of technological change on the demand for labor. several participants suggested that the arp could hasten the recovery, which could help limit longer-term damage in labor markets caused by the pandemic. participants observed that headline pce inflation continued to run below 2 percent. in the near term, the 12-month change in pce prices was expected to move above 2 percent as the low inflation readings from the spring of last year drop out of the calculation. most participants also pointed to supply constraints that could contribute to price increases for some goods in coming months as the economy continued to reopen. after the transitory effects of these factors fade, however, participants generally anticipated that annual inflation readings would edge down next year. subsequently, participants expected that inflation would likely move along a trajectory consistent with achieving the committee’s objectives over time, supported by strong aggregate demand, which participants expected would be driven in part by accommodative monetary and fiscal policies. participants discussed market- and survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations and their implications for the inflation outlook. market-based measures of inflation compensation at the 5- and 10-year horizons had continued to move up over the intermeeting period, while survey-based measures of inflation expectations were little changed on balance. a number of participants indicated that the increases in market-based measures of inflation compensation from the very low levels of last spring were consistent with the view that inflation was likely to move along a path over time consistent with the committee’s goals. participants noted that overall financial conditions remained highly accommodative, in part reflecting the stance of monetary policy. participants commented on the notable rise in longer-term treasury yields that occurred over the intermeeting period and generally viewed it as reflecting the improved economic outlook, some firming in inflation expectations, and expectations for increased treasury debt issuance. disorderly conditions in treasury markets or a persistent rise in yields that could jeopardize progress toward the committee’s goals were seen as cause for concern. while overall financial conditions were still seen as accommodative, a number of participants remarked that financing conditions remained challenging for many small businesses. a page 10 federal open market committee  couple of participants expressed concern that highly accommodative financial conditions could lead to excessive risk-taking and the buildup of financial imbalances. while generally acknowledging that the medium-term outlook for real gdp growth and employment had improved, participants continued to see the uncertainty surrounding that outlook as elevated. participants agreed that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. most participants indicated that the pandemic continued to pose considerable risks to the economic outlook, including risks associated with new more-contagious virus strains, obstacles in getting sufficient numbers of the public vaccinated, or socialdistancing fatigue. a few participants pointed to risks associated with stress in the cre sector or to risks associated with the unwinding of mortgage forbearance and eviction moratoriums provided to households. with regard to upside risks, some participants pointed to the possibility that fiscal policy could have a more expansionary effect than anticipated, that households could display a greater-than-expected willingness to spend out of accumulated savings, or that widespread vaccinations and easing of social distancing could result in a more rapid boost to spending and employment than anticipated. most participants noted that they viewed the risks to the outlook for inflation as broadly balanced. several remarked that supply disruptions and strong demand could push up price inflation more than anticipated. several participants commented that the factors that had contributed to low inflation during the previous expansion could again exert more downward pressure on inflation than expected. in their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the federal reserve’s commitment to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. participants noted that indicators of economic activity and employment had turned up recently after a period of moderation, although the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remained weak. despite these positive indicators and an improved public health situation, participants agreed that the economy remained far from the committee’s longer-run goals and that the path ahead remained highly uncertain, with the pandemic continuing to pose considerable risks to the outlook. consequently, participants judged that the current stance of policy and policy guidance remained appropriate to foster further economic recovery as well as to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations that remain well anchored at 2 percent. participants judged that the committee’s current guidance for the federal funds rate and asset purchases was serving the economy well. they noted that a benefit of the outcome-based guidance was that it did not need to be recalibrated often in response to incoming data or the evolving outlook. participants also noted the importance of communicating to the public that the existing guidance, together with the new monetary policy framework as delineated in the revised statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, meant that the path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet depend on actual progress toward reaching the committee’s maximum-employment and inflation goals. in particular, various participants noted that changes in the path of policy should be based primarily on observed outcomes rather than forecasts. participants agreed that overall financial conditions were accommodative. they noted that the federal reserve’s asset purchases since last march had materially eased financial conditions and were providing substantial support to the economy. participants noted that it would likely be some time until substantial further progress toward the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals would be realized and that, consistent with the committee’s outcome-based guidance, asset purchases would continue at least at the current pace until then. a number of participants highlighted the importance of the committee clearly communicating its assessment of progress toward its longer-run goals well in advance of the time when it could be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of asset purchases. the timing of such communications would depend on the evolution of the economy and the pace of progress toward the committee’s goals. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. they noted that following a moderation in the pace of the recovery, indicators of economic activity and employment had turned up recently, although the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remained weak. inflation continued to run below 2 percent. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of minutes of the meeting of march 16–17, 2021 page 11  credit to u.s. households and businesses. members also remarked that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. in addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis continued to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation and was posing considerable risks to the economic outlook. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. all members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. members expected to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until those outcomes were achieved. all members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, members agreed that it would be appropriate for the federal reserve to continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress had been made toward the committee’s maximumemployment and price-stability goals. they judged that these asset purchases would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, in- cluding readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. with regard to the postmeeting statement, in light of the notably positive tone of recent data, members judged that it was appropriate to incorporate that development in the description of the economic situation with the language that “indicators of economic activity and employment have turned up recently.” members also determined that, with oil prices having essentially retraced their pandemic-related declines, it was appropriate to remove the reference to oil prices as a factor holding down consumer price inflation and to simply state that “inflation continues to run below 2 percent.” regarding the directive to the desk, members agreed that the directive should incorporate the proposed increase in the percounterparty limit for the on rrp facility to $80 billion. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the system open market account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective march 18, 2021, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. • increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) by $40 billion per month. • increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. • conduct repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. • conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $80 billion per day; the per- page 12 federal open market committee  counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. the covid-19 pandemic is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. following a moderation in the pace of the recovery, indicators of economic activity and employment have turned up recently, although the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak. inflation continues to run below 2 percent. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy will depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. the ongoing public health crisis continues to weigh on economic activity, employment, and inflation, and poses considerable risks to the economic outlook. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. the committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, the federal reserve will continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. these asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, thomas i. barkin, raphael w. bostic, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, mary c. daly, charles l. evans, randal k. quarles, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective march 18, 2021. minutes of the meeting of march 16–17, 2021 page 13  it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, april 27– 28, 2021. the meeting adjourned at 10:20 a.m. on march 17, 2021. notation vote by notation vote completed on february 16, 2021, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on january 26–27, 2021.  james a. clouse secretary 
april 28, 2021 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. today my colleagues on the fomc and i kept interest rates near zero and maintained our sizable asset purchases. these measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. widespread vaccinations, along with unprecedented fiscal policy actions, are also providing strong support to the recovery. since the beginning of the year, indicators of economic activity and employment have strengthened. household spending on goods has risen robustly. the housing sector has more than fully recovered from the downturn, while business investment and manufacturing production have also increased. spending on services has also picked up, including at restaurants and bars. more generally, the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak but have shown improvement. while the recovery has progressed more quickly than generally expected, it remains uneven and far from complete. the path of the economy continues to depend significantly on the course of the virus and the measures undertaken to control its spread. since march, progress on vaccinations has limited the number of new cases, hospitalizations, and deaths. while the level of new cases remains concerning, especially as it reflects the spread of more infectious strains of the virus, continued vaccinations should allow for a return to more normal economic conditions later this year. in the  meantime, continued observance of public health and safety guidance will help us reach that goal as soon as possible. as with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. employment rose 916,000 in march, as the leisure and hospitality sector posted a notable gain for the second consecutive month. nonetheless, employment in this sector is still more than 3 million below its level at the onset of the pandemic. for the economy as a whole, payroll employment is 8.4 million below its pre-pandemic level. the unemployment rate remained elevated at 6 percent in march, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market remains notably below pre-pandemic levels. the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been the hardest hit. in particular, the high level of joblessness has been especially severe for lower-wage workers in the service sector and for african americans and hispanics. the economic dislocation has upended many lives and created great uncertainty about the future. readings on inflation have increased and are likely to rise somewhat further before moderating. in the near term, 12-month measures of pce inflation are expected to move above 2 percent as the very low readings from early in the pandemic fall out of the calculation and past increases in oil prices pass through to consumer energy prices. beyond these effects, we are also likely to see upward pressure on prices from the rebound in spending as the economy continues to reopen, particularly if supply bottlenecks limit how quickly production can respond in the near term. however, these one-time increases in prices are likely to have only transitory effects on inflation.  the fed’s response to this crisis has been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. as we say in our statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, we view maximum employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal. our ability to achieve maximum employment in the years ahead depends importantly on having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. as the committee reiterated in today’s policy statement, with inflation running persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. with regard to interest rates, we continue to expect it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. i would note that a transitory rise in inflation above 2 percent this year would not meet this standard. in addition, we will continue to increase our holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. the increase in our balance sheet since march 2020 has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy. the economy is a long way from our goals, and it is likely to take some time for substantial further progress to be achieved.  our guidance for interest rates and asset purchases ties the path of the federal funds rate and the size of the balance sheet to our employment and inflation goals. this outcome-based guidance will ensure that the stance of monetary policy remains highly accommodative as the recovery progresses. to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. thank you, mr. chair. first we’ll go paul kiernan. paul kiernan. hi, chairman powell. thanks for doing this. i guess, since i’m first, i’ll go ahead and re-up howard’s question from the last press conference: is it time to start talking about talking about tapering yet? have you and your colleagues had any conversations to this effect? thanks. chair powell. thank you. so, no, it is not time yet. we’ve said that we would let the public know when it is time to have that conversation, and we said we’d do that well in advance of any actual decision to taper our asset purchases, and we will do so. in the meantime, we’ll be monitoring progress toward our goals. we first articulated this “substantial further progress” test at our december meeting. economic activity and hiring have just recently picked up after slowing over the winter. and it will take some time before we see substantial further progress. paul kiernan. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. jonnelle at reuters.  jonnelle marte. okay. hi. thank you so much. my question is about what’s going on with the virus, and what if we don’t reach a level of herd immunity, per se. so, in your scenario, thinking about the outlook and the economy, do you have some model where you might start to still normalize policy even if there’s like a baseline of infection still going on? or how can you, you know, talk about how you’re weighing those things? chair powell. yes, so we have to leave questions about herd immunity and what that looks like to the health experts, but, but i would certainly say that what matters the most to the economic recovery continues to be controlling the virus. the economy can’t fully recover until people are confident that it’s safe to resume activities involving crowds of people. there may be people who are around the edges of the labor force who won’t come back in unless they feel really comfortable going back to their old jobs, for example, and there, there may be parts of the economy that will—that just won’t be able to, to really fully reengage until the pandemic is decisively behind us. but, you know, we’ve articulated particular guidance for tapering our asset purchases and for lifting off and raising interest rates. so for, for asset purchases, we’ve said that we would continue at the current pace of asset purchases until we see substantial further progress toward our goals. so—and that is, that is what it is, substantial further progress. for interest rates, as i—as i said a moment ago, we want to see labor market conditions consistent with maximum employment, we want to see inflation at 2 percent, and we want to see it on track to exceed 2 percent. so those are our tests. we don’t have an independent test to do with the virus. i will say, though, as i—as i started with, you know, the, the path of the virus is going to have an effect on our ability to achieve both of those tests. michelle smith. great. thank you. jeanna.  jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking our questions. i wonder if you could talk a little bit about that test for raising interest rates that you just elaborated. you’ve obviously made it very clear that you want to see improvements in the real economy and the real data and not in just sort of expectations data before making that move. but i guess i wonder what happens if inflation expectations were to move up before you see some sort of return to full employment. you know, it seems like a lot of sort of the stability in inflation has been tied to the fact that those have been so low and stable, and i guess i wonder how, how your reaction would be—sort of how your reaction to that is, is—how you’re thinking about that. chair powell. right. so it seems unlikely, frankly, that we would see inflation moving up in a persistent way that would actually move inflation expectations up while there was still significant slack in the labor market. i won’t say that it’s impossible, but it, it seems—it seems unlikely. it’s much more likely that we would—having achieved maximum-employment conditions—we’d also be seeing 2 percent inflation and be on track to see inflation moving above 2 percent. they tend to move together. so that’s not to say inflation won’t—might not move up, but for inflation to move up in a persistent way that, that really starts to move inflation expectations up, that would have to—that would take some time. and you would think that, that it would be quite likely that, that we’d be in very strong labor markets for that to be happening. if it—if that actually were to happen, though, there is a—there’s a paragraph in the—in the statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy which says that when the two goals are somewhat in conflict, we weigh various factors, including the, the time it would take to get back and [so] forth. so we do—it doesn’t really tell you what to do, but it tells you that we will weigh those two factors and how far we are away from them and how long it would take to reach them were we to reach that sort of pretty unlikely state.  michelle smith. thank you. steve liesman. steve liesman. thank you. mr. chairman, i want to follow up on jonnelle’s question, and i wonder if you can help us understand better your thinking about how covid infection rates and the virus calibrate with monetary policy. as you recall, we had a major resurgence in the virus last fall. and i’m wondering, would you need to be assured that there wasn’t such a resurgence coming before you began—i mean, for lack of a better term—thinking about thinking about tapering? and what kind of comfort level would you need? would it be something that would be declared from the cdc or the, or the world health organization—for example, downgrading the virus from a pandemic—before you have the comfort level to reverse course on policy? thank you. chair powell. yes. we, we really have—just articulated the goals that i’ve—that i’ve just mentioned a couple of times, which is substantial further progress toward our goals before we taper. now, that’s very likely—for us to achieve that, it’s very likely going to be the case that we’ve also made really significant progress on controlling the virus through vaccination and, and other—it, it—you know, those two things should more or less coexist. we haven’t articulated a separate test for a state of the virus that we’d like to achieve because we’re not—you know, we’re not experts in that area. we’re, we’re really focused on the economic outcomes, and, again, my, my guess is that we—it’s very likely, it seems to me, that for us to achieve the economic outcomes, we would need to taper or to raise interest rates. we would also have to have made very substantial progress in getting the virus under control—not, not necessarily fully under control. there is a, a possibility, of course, that we will, will have ongoing outbreaks over the summer and various regional outbreaks and potentially next winter  as well. but we’ll be looking for substantial progress toward our goal—substantial further progress toward our goals as we think about tapering asset purchases. steve liesman. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. victoria. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. i wanted to ask, you’ve talked a lot during this crisis about the need to have a lot of help from fiscal policy and monetary policy to make sure that there’s not long-term scarring in the economy. and i was just wondering, you know, given all of the policies that have been put in place, do you expect there to still be some long-term scarring? and, if so, you know, what are you most worried about? where are you most worried about that showing up? chair powell. so i would say that we were very worried about scarring, both in the labor market from people being out of—out of the labor market for an extended period of time. the evidence is clear that it becomes much more difficult if you’re out for a long time to get back in and get back to the life that you had. same thing with these small businesses, many of which are the work of generations. were we going to wipe out many of those unnecessarily? that was a big concern. i would say that, so far, you know, here we are in late april of 2021. we haven’t experienced that level of scarring either in the labor market or among smaller businesses. so we’re not living that, that downside case that we were very concerned about a year ago. notwithstanding that, we’re a long way from full employment. we’re—you know, payroll jobs are 8.4 million below where they were in february of 2020. we’ve got a long ways to go. and also, it’s going to be a different economy.  so we’ve been hearing a lot from companies that they are—they’ve been looking at deploying better technology and perhaps fewer people, including in some of the service industries that have been employing a lot of people. you know, it, it may well be—it seems quite likely that a number of the people who, who had those service-sector jobs will struggle to find the same job and may need time to find work and get back to the working life they had. these were people who were working in february of 2020. they clearly want to work. so those people are going to need—they’re going to need help. and so, while i would say we haven’t seen really highly elevated levels of unemployment for—you know, up in the teens that we thought we might have for an extended period of time, we’ve still got a lot of people who are out to—out of work. we want to get them back to work as quickly as possible, and that’s really one of the things we’re trying to achieve with our policy. michelle smith. thank you. rachel siegel. rachel siegel. thank you, michelle, and thank you, chair powell, for taking our questions. the housing market in many american cities is seeing booming prices, bidding wars, and all-cash offers well above asking price. and this is happening at the same time that housing is becoming much more expensive for lower-income americans and people who are still struggling from the pandemic. do you have concerns that there are localized housing bubbles or that there’s the potential for that, and what is the fed doing to monitor or address this? thank you. chair powell. so we do monitor the housing market very carefully, of course. and i would say that, before the pandemic, it’s a very different housing market than it was before the global financial crisis. and one of the main differences was that households were in very good  shape financially compared to where they were. in addition, most people who got mortgages were people with pretty high credit scores. there wasn’t the subprime—you know, low-doc, no-doc lending practices were not there. so we don’t have that kind of thing where we have a housing bubble where people are overlevered and owning a lot of houses. there’s no question, though, that housing prices are going up, and so we’re watching that carefully. it’s, it’s partly because there’s, there’s clearly strong demand, and there’s just not a lot of supply right now. so builders are, you know, struggling to keep up with the demand, clearly. inventories are tremendously low. we’re, we’re all hearing those stories. and if you’re—if you’re an entry level housing buyer, this is—this is a problem, because it just is going to be that much harder for people to get that first house, and that’s a problem. i mean, we—it’s part of a strong economy, with people having money to spend and wanting to invest in housing. so, in that sense, it’s good. it’s clearly the strongest housing market that we’ve seen since the global financial crisis. and, you know, my hope would be that, over time, housing builders can react to this demand and, and come up with more supply and workers will come back to work in that industry. so, you know, it is—it’s not an unalloyed good to have prices going up this much, and we’re watching it very carefully. i don’t see the kind of financial stability current concerns, though, that really do reside around the housing sector. so many of the financial crackups in all countries, all western countries, that have happened in the last 30 years have been around housing. we don’t—we really don’t see that here. we don’t see bad loans and unsustainable prices and that kind of thing. michelle smith. thank you. chris rugaber, associated press.  chris rugaber. thanks for taking my question. i wanted to ask about the labor market. do you—do you see things, such as in the beige book—you saw in the beige book anecdotes about businesses not able to find workers, [inaudible] back to the labor market for fear of getting sick, childcare concerns, and so forth. do you see these as also just sort of temporary bottlenecks that won’t have much effect on the long-term health of the labor market? or how are you thinking about these kinds of issues? chair powell. chris, you were breaking up a little there, but i think i did get your question. so i think there are a number of—a number of things going on there: the tension between a high level of unemployment and yet many, many companies saying they can’t find— an elevated number of companies saying that they can’t find workers. so, what’s really going on there? it, it should be a number of different things. there are workers who don’t actually have the specific skills that the employers are looking for. there may be geographical differences. it, it may also be that, for example, there—one big factor would be, schools aren’t open yet, so there are still people who are at home taking care of their children and would like to be back in the workforce but can’t be yet. there are people afraid of—there are virus fears that are weighing on people, so some—some people don’t want to go back to work. there are also a significant number of people who say they’ve retired—a large number of people that say that they’re retired. now, it’s hard to say whether they will come back in as the labor market strengthens and as covid, you know, becomes a—in the rearview mirror, in the history books, if you will. so—but clearly there’s something going, going on out there, as, as many companies are reporting labor shortages. we don’t see wages moving up yet, and presumably we would see  that in a real—you know, in a really tight labor market. and we may well start to see that. i do think—so what will happen—what we saw during the last expansion, and it may be a different expansion, we don’t know, but, but what we saw was that labor supply generally showed up. in other words, if you were worried about there—about running out of workers, it seemed like we never did. you know, labor force participation held up. people came in the labor force. they stayed in the labor force longer than expected. so my guess would be that you will see people coming back into the labor force, and these jobs will be—the labor market will reach equilibrium. maybe pay will go up. but i do think that—and i do think also that unemployment insurance benefits will run out in september, so to the extent that’s a factor, which is not clear, it will no longer be a factor fairly soon. so my guess is, it will come back to this economy where we have, you know, equilibrium between labor supply and labor demand. it may take some months, though. michelle smith. thank you. heather scott. chris rugaber. could i do a quick follow-up? michelle smith. i’m sorry. go ahead. go ahead, chris. chris rugaber. well [extended pause] michelle smith. we, we lost you, chris. let’s go on to heather. heather scott. thank you. good afternoon, chair powell. i wanted to ask you, you know, you’ve been hearing, of course, these concerns raised by larry summers and others about inflation and the fact that they think the fed might be—might let things get out of hand with the new policy stance. so my question is, can you tell us, what is different this time versus previous periods like in the ’60s when inflation got out of control? why are you confident with,  with the lags in monetary policy that the fed can get ahead of inflation and, and make sure it doesn’t go too far above the 2 percent target? chair powell. thanks for your question. so i actually have a couple things i’d like to say about inflation, including addressing your question. so let me start with just saying that we’re very strongly committed to achieving our objectives of maximum employment and price stability. our, our price stability goal is 2 percent inflation over the longer run, and we believe that having inflation average 2 percent over time will help anchor long-term inflation expectations at 2 percent. with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent for some time, the committee seeks inflation moderately above inflation for two times—above 2 percent for some time. so, with a, a little bit of context, we’re, we’re making our way through an unprecedented series of events, really, in which a synchronized global shutdown is now giving way to widespread reopening of economies in many places around the world. in the united states, fiscal and monetary policy continue to provide strong support: vaccinations are now widespread, and the economy is beginning to move ahead with real momentum. during this time of reopening, we are likely to see some upward pressure on prices, and i’ll discuss why. but those pressures are likely to be temporary as they are associated with the reopening process. in an episode of one-time price increases as the economy reopens is not the same thing as, and is not likely to lead to, persistently higher year-over-year inflation into the future— inflation at levels that are not consistent with our goal of 2 percent inflation over time. indeed, it is the fed’s job to make sure that that does not happen. if, if, contrary to expectations, inflation were to move persistently and materially above 2 percent in a manner that threatened to move longer-term inflation expectations materially above 2 percent, we would use our tools to bring  inflation and expectations down to mandate-consistent levels. and i would say, if i may, that is a principal difference from—we’re all very familiar at the fed with the history of the 1960s and ’70s, of course. and we know that our job is to achieve 2 percent inflation over time. we’re committed to that, and we will use our tools to do that. so that’s a very different situation than you had back in the 1960s—or many, many differences, actually. so let me talk quickly about the two reasons—two, or you could say three, but really two main reasons why we think inflation will move up in the near term. the first is the base effects. twelve-month measures of inflation are likely to move well above 2 percent over the next few months as the very low inflation readings recorded in march and april of last year drop out of the calculation. that process has already started to show up. you saw it in the march cpi reading, and you’ll see it later this week in the pce price data. these base effects will contribute about 1 percentage point to headline inflation and about 0.7 percentage point to core inflation in april and may. so, significant increases, and they’ll disappear over the following months. and they’ll be transitory. they carry no implication for the rate of inflation in later periods. so that’s base effects. the other big one i would talk about is bottlenecks. so this is what we’re seeing in supply chains in various industries, and we’re, we’re in close touch with all of these industries. you know, the fed has a network of contacts that is unequaled in businesses and in nonprofits for that matter, too. so what do we mean by a bottleneck? a bottleneck really is a temporary blockage or restriction in the supply chain for, for a particular good or goods, something that slows down the process of producing goods and delivering them to the market. we think of bottlenecks as things that, in their nature, will be resolved as workers and businesses adapt, and we think of them as not calling for a change in monetary policy since they’re temporary and  expected to resolve themselves. we know that the base effects will disappear in a few months. it’s much harder to predict with confidence the amount of time it will take to resolve the bottlenecks, or for that matter, the temporary effects that they will have on prices in the meantime. so, you know, i’ll just sum up and say, we understand our job. we will do our job. and we are, we are focused—as you’ve seen, for many years, we’ve been focused on inflation deviating below 2 percent, and we used our tools aggressively to keep it back up at 2 percent. if, if we see inflation moving materially above 2 percent in a persistent way that risks inflation expectations drifting up, then we will use our tools to guide inflation and expectations back down to 2 percent. no one should doubt that we will do that. this is not what we expect. but no one should doubt that, in the event, we would be prepared to use our tools. michelle smith. thank you. james politi. james politi. chair powell, you said a few weeks ago that it would—thank you, chair powell. you said a few weeks ago that it would take a string of months of job creation of about a million to achieve progress towards your goal. can you define what your, what your definition of “a string of months” is more specifically? and, on inflation, the fomc said the rise in inflation we’re beginning to see largely reflects transitory factors, as you just described. but why use the word “largely,” and what are the factors driving higher prices that may not be transitory, based on the initial data that you’re seeing? chair powell. so, what is “a string”? what do i mean by “a string”? well, i would say, what we have right now is one really good—i can tell you what it’s not. it’s not one really good employment reading, which is what we got in march. we got close to a million jobs in march and a very strong labor market reading. and i was just suggesting that we’d want to see  more like that. we’re 8½ million jobs below where we were in february of 2020, and that doesn’t account for growth in the labor force and growth in the economy, that trend we were on. so we have—we’re a long way from our, our goals. and we don’t have to get all the way to our goals to taper asset purchases, we just need to make substantial further progress. it’s going to take some time. on, on “largely,” there are a bunch of factors. i was really thinking—we were thinking of the base effects and also the energy effects. i wasn’t meaning to say there are some real effects. i mean, there are always—there are always relative prices going up and down within inflation. you know, there’s a basket for cpi or pce. there are, you know, many, many, many factors that go into it. relative prices are always moving up and down. this, this—we think it’s, it’s very fair to say that the increases we see and, frankly, are about to see later this week are largely due to base effects. it would have been more contentious to say “entirely due to base effects” because there are some things that are always going up, and so we just said “largely.” michelle smith. [inaudible] catarina saraiva. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking our questions. over the past decade, the fed has invested significant resources in large-scale bank supervision—has completely overhauled that approach. and it’s even created a special committee that looks horizontally across the largest banks to find common risks. did the fed not see that multiple banks had large exposures to archegos? if not, why not? and then, what regulatory changes would you like to see implemented to change that going forward? chair powell. we’re, we, we supervise banks to make sure that they have risk- management systems in place so that they can spot these things. we don’t manage their companies for them or, or try to manage individual risks. in the grand scheme of these large  institutions, the archegos risks were not systemically important or were not of the size that they would have really created trouble for any of those institutions. what was troubling, though, was that this could happen in a business for a number of firms that is thought to be—to carry relatively well understood risks. the prime brokerage business is, is a well understood business, and so it was surprising that a number of them would have had this. and it was essentially, i believe, the fact that, that they had the same big risk position on with a number of firms, and they weren’t—some of the firms were not aware that there were other firms that had those things. i, i wouldn’t say it’s in any way an indictment of our supervision of these firms. it, it—in some cases, it may be they were—it seems as though there were risk-management breakdowns at some of the firms, not all of them. and that’s what we’re looking into. michelle smith. thank you. nancy marshall-genzer. nancy marshall-genzer. hi, chair powell. i—i’m wondering, are you planning to visit the homeless encampment that’s near the fed in washington that you drive by? have you been invited, and if you went, what would you be looking to learn there? chair powell. you know, frankly, yes. i have not had a chance to do it yet, but i’ve been very busy, but i will visit. i don’t want to visit it at a time of a lot of media attention, because i don’t want that to be part of the story. but i will—i will go visit when, when it’s no longer a, a news story. and i—you know, i—i’ve met with homeless people many times, a number of times, anyway, let’s say. and i, i think it’s always good to talk to people and hear what’s going on in their lives. what you find out is, they’re you. they’re just us. i mean, they’re, they’re—these are people who, in many cases, had jobs and, you know, they have lives, and they’ve just, they’ve just found themselves in this place. it’s, it’s a—it’s a difficult problem,  though. you know, there are many, many facets of it, and i’m well aware that this is not something that the fed has all the tools for or anything like that. but i, i will do that when, when the need arises and when, when it’s not so much, you know, in the public eye. nancy marshall-genzer. and is there anything specifically that you would be looking to learn there? chair powell. not really. i mean, i, i think i know what i’ll find there. i, i think you, you connect with these people and what you—again, what you find is, they’re like you. that could be you. i mean, that could be your sister. that could be, you know, your kid. you, you always feel that way in that sort of an encounter, and, you know, it just is a—it’s a—it’s an important thing to engage in, i think. and i think, you know, we bring that understanding into our lives and, frankly, into our work—the work that we do as well. michelle smith. thank you. hannah lang. hannah lang. hi. i wanted to ask about digital currency. you previously said a few times that you think it’s important for the u.s. to get a central bank digital currency right rather than be first. but with countries like china moving very quickly on cbdc, i was wondering what you think the risks are of, of moving too slow on, on digital currency. chair powell. right. so i think the first thing to say is that we feel an obligation to understand the technology and all of the policy issues very, very well. central bank digital currencies are now possible, and we’re going to see some of them around the world. and we need to understand whether that’s something that would be a good thing for the people that we serve. how would it work in our system? and there are some very, very difficult questions to answer, but i think we—and we are engaged in a serious program to understand both the technology and the policy issues.  i am—i would say this: we’re the world’s reserve currency, and that means that the dollar is used in transactions all around the world, far more than any other currency. and that’s because of our rule of law; our democratic institutions, which are the best in the world; our economy; our industrious people; all the things that make the united states the united states. that’s why we’re the, the reserve currency. and, of course, we have open capital accounts, which is essential if you’re going to be the reserve currency. so those are the factors that make us the reserve currency. i am—i’m less concerned that someone—that another country might have a digital currency first. you know, ask yourself the question, does that mean that, if you were a company that’s doing international business, would you then suddenly start to use that currency to use your—do your international transactions, or would you still do them in dollars, where, where— which is what everyone does? and i’m not so concerned about, about that. i am really concerned about getting it right. it is—it is a—it is a tricky set of questions that we have to navigate in a world where we already have, remember, a highly evolved payment system. we have fednow and other immediately available funds. pretty soon everybody will be able to, to do what people do in other parts of the world, which is just use their phone to make immediately available payments all the time. it’ll be normal. and what would be the role of a central bank digital currency in that kind of an environment? far more important to get it right than it is to do it fast or feel that we need to rush to reach conclusions because other countries are moving ahead. i mean, that—what the china—the currency that’s being used in china is not one that would—that would work here. it’s, it’s one that really allows the government to see every payment that’s used—for which it is used in real time. it’s much more to do with things that are  happening within their own financial system than it is, i think, to do with, with the global—you know, sort of global competition. michelle smith. thank you. michael derby. michael derby. thank you for taking my question. i wanted to ask you another question about inflation, and it has to do with inflation expectations. a number of different surveys and, and market indicators are showing, you know, multiyear highs in inflation expectations ratings. so i wondered, you know, if, if that was something that you saw consistent with your inflation outlook. is that something that worries you, or do you see that as, maybe, you know, the success of the fed’s new inflation framework, you know, making it out to the, to the broader public? chair powell. right. inflation expectations before the pandemic hit—and here we think of survey, market based—survey being either households or, or economists and, and market based. you look at all of those, and i would say that they were at the low end of what would have been consistent with a 2 percent inflation target, particularly our 2 percent inflation target, which calls for 2 percent average inflation. so they’re at the low end. inflation expectations actually went down a bit at the beginning of the pandemic, and now they’ve just moved back up to levels broadly—that, that are where they were in 2018, or in some cases 2014, and, i would say, more consistent with our mandate. and we want them to be—we want them to be higher and—you know, on a persistent basis. we want inflation to run a little bit higher than it has been running for the last quarter of a century. we want it to average 2 percent, not 1.7 percent. and for that, we need to see inflation expectations that are consistent with that, really well anchored at 2 percent. we don’t really see that yet, but i would say that, that, you know, breakevens have moved up, in a way. breakevens  are based on cpi, of course, but they’re, they’re now at levels that are—that are pretty close to mandate consistent, whereas before, they were below. we monitor inflation expectations very, very carefully, as you would obviously know. so that’s where—that’s where i would say it is. michael derby. just one small follow-up. do you have any redlines on inflation readings where if, you know, you hit, like, a certain number on, say, you know, core pce, that would be, you know, a trigger response from the fed? chair powell. it doesn’t work that way. you know, we’re, we’re—inflation measures are always going to be a bit volatile. we expect—as i mentioned, we expect core and, and headline pce to move up because of base effects, and—you know, i—and we expect that to go away. we, we also expect these, these bottleneck effects to come in. we don’t know how persistent they’ll be. we, we think they’ll—you know, it’s a matter of, of when they will pass through, not whether they will pass through. but we can’t be confident about the exact timing of that or the size of them. they don’t seem especially large at the moment, but, you know, we, we don’t know. i mean, you know, this is—this is all about the reopening of the economy. that’s what’s happening. we had it—we were in a deep, deep hole a year ago, and now, with a lot of help from fiscal policy, some additional help from monetary policy, and, you know, a great deal of help from vaccination, we’re seeing a strong rebound in activity. and what’s happening is, it’s, it’s—demand can be spurred with fiscal transfers and—the saved-up fiscal transfers and, and people going back to work and things like that. the supply side will take a little bit of time to adapt. new restaurants will have to be opened. the supply of various inputs into the goods part of the economy will have to be brought back up to speed. and you—you’re seeing some of that.  that’ll happen over a period of time, over coming quarters. you’ll see some of the bottlenecks resolved, but the last one may not be resolved for some time. michael derby. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. brian cheung. brian cheung. brian cheung with—hi, chairman powell. brian cheung with yahoo finance. i wanted to ask about financial stability, which is a part of the fed’s reaction function here. it seems like to people on the outside who might not follow finance daily, they’re paying attention to things like gamestop, now dogecoin. and it seems like there’s interesting reach for yield in this market—to some extent, also archegos. so does the fed see a relationship between low rates and easy policy to those things, and is there a financial stability concern from the fed’s perspective at this time? chair powell. right. so we look at—financial stability for us is really—we have a broad framework, so we don’t just jump from one thing to another. i know many people just look at asset prices, and they look at some of the things that are going on in the—in the equity markets, which, which i think do reflect froth in the equity markets. but really, it—really, we try to stick to a framework for financial stability so we can—so we can talk about it the same way each time and so we can be held accountable for it. so one of the areas is asset prices, and i would say some of the asset prices are high. you are seeing, seeing things in the capital markets that, that are—that are a bit frothy. that’s a fact. i won’t say it has nothing to do with monetary policy, but it also—it has a tremendous amount to do with vaccination and reopening of the economy. that’s really what has been moving markets a lot in the last few months is this turn away from what was a pretty dark winter to now a fast—a much faster vaccination process and a faster reopening. so that’s, that’s part of what’s going on.  the other—the other things, though—you know, leverage in the financial system, is it— is, is not a problem. that’s a—that’s a—that was one of the four pillars. asset prices was one. leverage in the financial system is, is not an issue; we have very well capitalized large banks. we have funding risks for, for our largest financial institutions that are also very low. we do have some funding risk issues around money market funds, but i would say they’re not systemic right now. and, and the household sector is actually in pretty good shape. it was in—it was in a very good shape as a relative matter before the financial crisis—sorry, the pandemic crisis hit. there were real concerns, of course, with high levels of unemployment and loss of wages and all of that, that the—that the household sector would, would, would weaken dramatically. that hasn’t happened. so, with the fiscal transfers, money that’s on household balance sheets, they’re in good shape. you see relatively low defaults and that kind of thing. so the overall financial stability picture is mixed, but, on balance, it’s—you know, it’s manageable, i would say. and it’s—by the way, i think it’s appropriate and important for financial conditions to remain accommodative to support economic activity. again, 8½ million people who had jobs in february don’t have them now, and, you know, there’s a long way to go until we reach our goal. so that’s what i would say. brian cheung. as a follow-up, you mentioned money market pressures. the fed didn’t make changes to interest on reserves or excess reserves. what was the logic behind that? it seems like sofr has been drifting closer to zero. so just hoping for clarification on that. chair powell. right. so the federal funds rate has been well within target and—at target range, and money market funds—money market conditions are, are fine. we have the ability to use our administrative tools to make sure that that remains the case. we do expect  further downward pressure on, on rates through asset purchases and also the runoff in the—in the treasury general account. but, at this point, we didn’t see a need for—to, to deploy our tools to, to support rates. and, of course, we will do so if, if the need does arise. michelle smith. thank you. jean yung. jean yung. hi, chair powell. i wanted to ask a, a similar question. we are seeing elevated market valuations, and some economists are concerned that the economy might overheat, at least for a period of time. so should the fed and other regulators be thinking about tightening capital requirements or extending oversight to the nonbank sector so that financial stability risks stay as low as they have been? thank you. chair powell. so i think capital requirements for banks are, to me—went up tremendously, really, over the course of the 10 years between the financial crisis and the arrival of the pandemic. and the banks really made it through a real stress test very well and passed three, three of our—two of our stress tests, and that is another one that’s pending. so capital is, is in a good place, as far as i’m concerned, in the banking system. but, to your point, what we saw was—so what, what kind of happened during the pandemic crisis that, that requires attention, and number one is money market funds and corporate bond funds where we saw run dynamics again, and we need to—we’re, we’re looking at that. so we’re looking at ways, and people around the world are looking at ways, to make those vehicles resilient so that they don’t have to be, you know, supported by the government whenever there’s, you know, severely stressed market conditions. it’s a private business. they, they need to have the wherewithal to stay in business and not just count on the fed and others to—around the world to come in. so that was that.  the other one is treasury market structure. dealers are committing less capital to that activity now than they were 10 or 15 years ago, and the need for capital is higher because there’s so much more supply of treasuries. and so there are some questions about treasury market structure, and there’s a lot of careful work going on to understand whether there’s something we can do about this, because we—you know, the u.s. treasury market is probably the most single important—single most important market in, in the economy and the world. it needs to be liquid. it needs to function well for the good of our economy and the good of our citizens. so it’s not clear what, what—where that takes you, but we, we are taking a careful look—and the treasury department is, is really going to be leading this—at, at treasury market structure and all of the various aspects of that to make sure that we do have a resilient, strong treasury market that can work even in difficult times. as, as you know, at the very beginning of the financial—of the—of this recent crisis, there was such a demand for selling treasuries, including by foreign central banks, that, really, the dealers couldn’t handle the volume. and so what was happening was, the market was really starting to lose function, and that’s—that was a really serious problem which we had to solve through really massive asset purchases. and, you know, so we’d like to, we’d like to see if there isn’t something we can do to—is—do we need to build against that kind of an extreme tail risk, and if so, what would that look like? michelle smith. thank you. edward lawrence. edward lawrence. thank you, fed chairman, for the question. so i’m interested in your thoughts. there’s so much fiscal help and accommodation from the federal reserve. you said today the vaccinations will follow the normal economic conditions or, or lead to more normal economic conditions later this year. when do you see the economy being able to stand on its own feet, so to speak? and, along those lines, with the fiscal spending and the  accommodation you talked about with transitory inflation, does more spending need to be injected into the system, or will that affect that transitory nation—nature of the inflation? thank you. chair powell. when will the economy be, be able to stand on its own feet? i’m not sure if—i’m not sure what the exact nature of that question is. edward lawrence. what, what i’m saying is, is, you know, when will the—when will you need to lower the, the amount of treasuries you’re buying to sort of taper off a little bit? when can it stand without having that support from the monetary policy side? and then—and then, further, the transitory. chair powell. okay. sorry. so we have—you know, we’ve articulated our test for that, as you know, and that is just, we’ll continue asset purchases at this pace until we see substantial further progress. and we’re, we’re going to communicate well in advance of any decision. we’re going to let, you know, the, the public know that that’s what we’re thinking. and, and so there’ll be a lot of warning and that kind of thing. but it’s about substantial further progress toward our goals. that’s, that’s really all it is. it doesn’t have any, any external, virus- related specific requirement, although, again, i do think it’ll—you know, the, the virus will need to continue to be controlled for us to achieve those economic goals. but it’s really the economic goals. now, your second question. sorry, just say again. i didn’t quite get that question. edward lawrence. yes, sure. with all the fiscal spending that’s happened and the accommodation and—does, does the system need more spending either from the fiscal side or accommodation, or would more spending affect the transitory nature of the inflation and put those upward, upward pressures on inflation long term?  chair powell. so it’s really up to congress. we—we’re not an adviser to congress. you know, we don’t, we don’t weigh in on specific fiscal bills or proposals. that’s really between elected parties. you know, basically, fiscal policy is the province of people who stand for democratic election and win, and they get to make those very difficult decisions, and they get to be accountable to the voters. we didn’t do any of that, and we don’t have a seat at that table. we don’t seek a seat at that table. so that’s really something for congress and the administration to, to deal with. michelle smith. thank you. greg robb. greg robb. hi, greg robb from marketwatch. thank you—thank you so much for the—for the opportunity. i wanted to circle back to the housing market. it’s just kind of confusing that the question and your answer—you know, the housing market is strong, prices are up. and yet the fed is buying $40 billion per month in mortgage-related assets. why is that, and are those purchases playing a role at all in pushing up prices? thank you. chair powell. yes. i, i mean, we’re—we started buying mbs because the mortgage-backed security market was, was really experiencing severe dysfunction, and we’ve sort of, sort of articulated, you know, what our exit path is from that. it’s not meant to provide direct assistance to, to the housing market. that was never the intent. it was really just to keep that as—it’s a very close relation to the treasury market and a very important market on its own. and so that’s, that’s why we, we bought as we did during the global financial crisis; we bought mbs too. again, not, not an intention to send help to the housing market, which was, which was really not, not a problem this time at all. so—and, you know, it’s, it’s a situation where we will, we will taper asset purchases when the time comes to do that, and those, those purchases will come to zero over time. and that time is not yet.  greg robb. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. and for the last question, we’ll go to mike mckee. michael mckee. thank you, mr. chairman. since i am last, let me go back to paul’s question, the first question, and ask him—ask you whether—not whether you’re thinking about thinking of tapering, but why you’re not. we’re seeing bank lending fall. the markets seem to be operating well. are you afraid of a taper tantrum? or is it, as one money manager put it, “if you get out of the markets, there aren’t enough buyers for all of the treasury debt, and so rates would have to go way up”? the bottom-line question is, what do we get for $120 billion a month that we couldn’t get for less? chair powell. so it’s really not more complicated than this. we, we articulated the “substantial further progress” test at our december meeting. and, really, for the next couple of months, we made relatively little progress toward our goals. and, remember, substantial further progress from december—from our december meeting. and then vaccination started to get more widespread. the economy reopened. we got a really nice job report for march. it doesn’t constitute substantial further progress. it’s not close to substantial further progress. we’re hopeful that we will see along this path a way to that goal. and we believe we will; it just is a question of when. and so, when that time—when the time comes for us to talk about talking about it, we’ll do that. and—but that time is not now. it’s—we’re just not—we’re not that far. we’ve had one great jobs report. it’s not enough. you know, we’re going to act on actual data, not on our forecast. and we’re just going to need to see more data. that’s—it’s no, no more complicated than that.  michael mckee. well, if you leave rates where they are, it doesn’t change anything. but does it change anything if you actually tapered a bit? if you spent less, would you still get the same effect on the economy? chair powell. if we bought less? you’re, you’re very faint. so if someone has the volume, they can turn it up. but if we bought less, you know, no. i mean, i think the effect is proportional to the amount we buy. it’s, it’s really part of overall accommodative financial conditions. we, we have tried to create accommodative financial conditions to support economic activity, and we did that. and we articulated the—you know, the, the tests for withdrawing that accommodation. and we think, you know—so we’re waiting to see those tests to be fulfilled both for asset purchases and for liftoff of rates. and, you know, when the tests are fulfilled, we’ll, we’ll go ahead. as we—you know, we’ve done this before. we did it in, in the last—after the last crisis, and, you know, we’ll do it in, in maybe—we’ll do it—as those tests are satisfied, we’ll do it. and the—and the only thing that will guide us is, are the tests met? you know, that, that’s what we focused on: is—have, have the macroeconomic conditions that we’ve articulated, have they been realized? that will be the test for, for tapering asset purchases and for raising interest rates. michelle smith. thank you very much. take care. chair powell. thank you.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations the system open market account (soma) manager first discussed developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. financial conditions eased modestly as market participants continued to focus on progress toward economic reopening as well as supportive monetary and fiscal policy. equity prices rose, with the s&p 500 index reaching a record high, while treasury yields, the dollar, and credit spreads declined modestly. the equity gains were broad based across sectors, though shares of small caps, as captured by the russell 2000 index, declined. news regarding losses associated with a highly levered family investment office affected the equity prices of some large financial firms, but the broader financial market effects appeared limited. after rising sharply in recent months, longer-term treasury yields declined modestly over the intermeeting period, even as market expectations for u.s. growth continued to be revised higher. contacts reported that the earlier increases in yields drew in a range of investors, including foreign institutions, pension funds, and insurance companies. against this backdrop, term premiums as measured by term structure models and based on es-  minutes of the meeting of april 27–28, 2021 page 3 timates using the open market desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants moved slightly lower. nonetheless, market participants were attentive to the potential for rising yields going forward, and, in recent months, desk survey respondents had increased the probability they attach to higher yields at the end of 2021. could ultimately lead to a greater share of federal reserve balance sheet expansion being channeled into on rrp and other federal reserve liabilities. although few survey respondents expected an adjustment to administered rates at the current meeting, more than half expected an adjustment by the end of the june fomc meeting. regarding expectations for the policy outlook, the market- and survey-implied paths of the federal funds rate were both relatively little changed over the intermeeting period, and the modal survey path in later years continued to imply that the target range would gradually increase to a level just over 2 percent in 2026. expectations for the path of asset purchases were also stable, and market participants remained focused on the committee’s communications about progress toward its goals. according to the median survey responses, the federal reserve’s net purchases of treasury and agency securities were expected to end three quarters after the first reduction in the pace of asset purchases, and the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate was expected to occur three quarters after that. the manager concluded with an update on three operational issues. following the review of the on rrp facility discussed at the previous meeting, the desk planned to relax counterparty eligibility criteria for money funds and government-sponsored enterprises in order to allow smaller counterparties of these types to participate. the desk also planned to make modest adjustments to the allocation of treasury outright purchases across maturity ranges to ensure that purchases remain roughly proportional to the outstanding amounts of treasury securities. these minor technical adjustments would have no implications for the effects of the federal reserve’s asset purchases on overall financial conditions. finally, the manager requested that the committee vote to maintain the standing u.s. dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements and to renew the reciprocal currency arrangements with canada and mexico under the north american framework agreement. recent financial market developments across advanced economies reflected differing expectations for economic growth and monetary policy. some countries that were expected to recoup covid-19-related output losses earlier than others had seen larger yield increases and more appreciation in their currencies in recent months. over the intermeeting period, the bank of canada announced a reduction in the pace of its asset purchases and brought forward its forecast of when conditions would be met for an increase in its policy rate. the manager turned next to money markets and the federal reserve’s balance sheet. reserve balances increased further this intermeeting period to a record level of $3.9 trillion. the effective federal funds rate was steady at 7 basis points. however, amid ongoing strong demand for safe short-term investments and reduced treasury bill supply, the secured overnight financing rate (sofr) stood at 1 basis point throughout the period. the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility continued to effectively support policy implementation, and take-up peaked at more than $100 billion. a modest amount of trading in overnight repurchase agreement (repo) markets occurred at negative rates, although this development appeared to largely reflect technical factors. the soma manager noted that downward pressure on overnight rates in coming months could result in conditions that warrant consideration of a modest adjustment to administered rates and the committee voted unanimously to renew the reciprocal currency arrangements with the bank of canada and the bank of mexico; these arrangements are associated with the federal reserve’s participation in the north american framework agreement of 1994. in addition, the committee voted unanimously to renew the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the bank of canada, the bank of england, the bank of japan, the european central bank, and the swiss national bank. the votes to renew the federal reserve’s participation in these standing arrangements occur annually at the april or may fomc meeting. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. discussion of repurchase agreement arrangements the staff briefed participants on the federal reserve’s experience with the daily repo operations with primary dealers that have been in place since september 2019 and the temporary foreign and international monetary authorities (fima) repo facility established in march  page 4 federal open market committee last year. the briefing also reviewed considerations that could be relevant for policymakers’ judgments regarding whether these arrangements should become permanent standing facilities. the staff noted that repo operations have been a useful tool in controlling the federal funds rate by adding reserves to ensure that they remain ample and by limiting pressures in repo markets that could spill over into unsecured markets. in march 2020, repo operations worked in concert with other measures to manage shocks to financial markets by stabilizing treasury market conditions. since june 2020, when the rate on overnight repo operations was raised relative to the rate of interest on excess reserves, repo operations have served as a backstop and there has been no substantive usage. regarding considerations concerning a permanent standing repo facility, the briefing noted that standing repo operations could be viewed as useful in forestalling funding strains that could spill over into other overnight markets and limit dealers’ intermediation activity in financial markets. however, a standing repo facility could be seen as a form of liquidity support for nonbank financial institutions, and one that could create incentives for firms with access to the facility to take on more liquidity risk against eligible securities than would otherwise be the case. in discussing considerations for the establishment of a standing fima repo facility, the staff noted that such a facility could limit the propensity for foreign official institutions to execute large sales of u.s. treasury securities in a stress environment that, in turn, could exacerbate strains in broader u.s. domestic financial markets. the briefing also noted some potential drawbacks of such a facility, including less transparency regarding its operations relative to other federal reserve facilities. in their discussion of considerations related to the establishment of a standing repo facility as part of the committee’s overall approach to policy implementations in an ample reserves regime, a substantial majority of participants saw the potential benefits of an appropriately calibrated facility as outweighing the potential costs. nearly all participants commented that a standing repo facility, by acting as a backstop, could help address pressures in the markets for u.s. treasury securities and treasury repo that could spill over to other funding markets and impair the implementation and transmission of monetary policy. in this regard, a number of participants noted the potential for pressures in short-term funding markets to arise from time to time, even with monetary policy operating in an ample-reserves regime. many participants noted that a standing facility could provide a timely and automatic response to incipient market pressures; they remarked that such pressures can be difficult to anticipate and, as a result, might not be as promptly addressed with discretionary operations. a few participants noted that a standing repo facility could provide counterparties with additional flexibility in managing the composition of their holdings of high-quality liquid assets, potentially reducing the demand for reserves. a few participants cautioned that establishing a standing repo facility should not be viewed as a way of implementing monetary policy without an ample supply of reserves. a couple of participants remarked that most of the benefits of a standing repo facility could be realized by the federal reserve maintaining readiness to conduct repo operations on short notice as needed, noting that such an arrangement could avoid some of the costs of a standing facility. a few participants mentioned that a standing repo facility could be perceived as a means of supporting the financing of the u.s. treasury or as a permanent federal reserve liquidity backstop for nondepository institutions; a couple of others called out the risk that such a facility could crowd out private market sources of liquidity provision. participants noted that it would be important to carefully consider key design elements of a potential standing repo facility, including the pricing structure, counterparties, and range of collateral accepted. a number of participants commented that the counterparties at such a facility should include depository institutions. several participants noted the facility’s design should be targeted specifically to enhance control of the federal funds rate rather than to limit volatility in the repo market. in their discussion of considerations related to the establishment of a permanent fima repo facility, a vast majority of participants saw the potential benefits as outweighing the costs. participants highlighted a number of benefits of a standing fima repo facility, with many noting that it could support smoother functioning in u.s. treasury securities markets and u.s. financial markets more broadly by providing foreign official holders of u.s. treasury securities with an alternative to outright sales of these securities in times of market stress. a few participants noted that, had a fima repo facility been in place in march 2020, it likely would have significantly damped pressures in these markets caused by the abrupt need for dollar funding abroad. several participants suggested that a standing fima repo facility could be viewed as complementing the existing dollar swap lines by extending access to dollar funding for a broader range of central banks and foreign official institutions. participants also commented on some potential risks of a  minutes of the meeting of april 27–28, 2021 page 5 standing fima repo facility, including less transparency in connection with fima repo operations relative to other federal reserve facilities. staff review of the economic situation the covid-19 pandemic and the measures undertaken to contain its spread continued to affect economic activity in the united states and abroad. the information available at the time of the april 27–28 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) had increased in the first quarter of 2021 at a pace that was faster than in the fourth quarter of last year but had not yet returned to its pre-pandemic level. labor market conditions improved markedly in march, though employment remained well below its level at the start of 2020. consumer price inflation through february—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—continued to run well below 2 percent. total nonfarm payroll employment surged in march, with a notable gain in the leisure and hospitality sector. as of march, payroll employment had retraced almost two-thirds of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. the unemployment rate declined to 6 percent in march, as the number of workers on temporary layoff continued to fall and the number on permanent layoff ticked down. although the unemployment rates for african americans and hispanics fell, both rates remained well above the national average; in addition, the asian unemployment rate moved up and was equal to the national average in march. the labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio increased in march, though both measures remained below their prepandemic levels. initial claims for unemployment insurance had moved down, on net, since mid-march and were at the lowest level since the beginning of the pandemic, though they remained exceptionally high by prepandemic standards. weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by federal reserve board staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp, which were available through the first half of april, suggested that the rate of increase in private employment had slowed somewhat relative to its earlier robust pace. average hourly earnings for all employees rose 4.2 percent over the 12 months ending in march. the 12-month change in average hourly earnings continued to be influenced by the effect of the pandemic on the composition of the workforce; in particular, the concentration of job losses among lower-wage workers since early last year had resulted in large increases in this meas- ure that were not indicative of tight labor market conditions. by contrast, a staff measure of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the adp data was 3.1 percent in march and continued to run below its pre-pandemic pace; this measure had likely been less affected by shifts in the composition of the workforce. total pce price inflation was 1.6 percent over the 12 months ending in february and continued to be held down by low rates of resource utilization. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending in february, while the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 1.6 percent in february. in march, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 2.6 percent, boosted by increases in consumer energy prices, while core cpi inflation was 1.6 percent over the same period. in the first quarter of 2021, the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, had returned to the level that prevailed in 2018. real pce declined in february; however, available indicators—including the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate pce—pointed to a large increase in march and for the first quarter as a whole, with federal stimulus payments having likely supported the march increase. housing starts bounced back in march following a weather-induced decline in february. although existing home sales fell in february and march, the declines appeared to reflect continued limited availability of homes for sale rather than weakening demand; in addition, february’s drop in new home sales was retraced in march. available indicators suggested that equipment and intangibles investment had increased in the first quarter of 2021, though at a slower pace than that seen in the fourth quarter of 2020. likewise, drilling investment appeared to have moved up, boosted in part by higher energy prices. however, investment in nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector looked as though it had declined further in the first quarter, likely reflecting ongoing uncertainty about the longer-term effects of the pandemic on businesses. manufacturing output rebounded strongly in march following weather-related disruptions to production in february. the march rise in factory output occurred despite lingering supply constraints; for example, weather-  page 6 federal open market committee damaged facilities in texas used to produce petrochemical and plastic materials had not yet been fully repaired, and semiconductor shortages were still weighing on motor vehicle production. total real government purchases appeared to have moved up in the first quarter after having declined over the second half of 2020. available data suggested that a jump in federal nondefense purchases had offset a decline in defense purchases; in addition, indicators of real state and local purchases pointed to a small first-quarter increase. data for february showed a wider nominal u.s. international trade deficit than in january. both imports and exports fell from their january levels, the first nominal decline in each since last may. goods imports were held back in february by weakness in imports for automotive products and consumer goods but remained higher than their pre-pandemic level. nominal goods exports in february were weak in most categories and were still below their pre-pandemic level. imports and exports of services remained depressed, weighed down by the continued suspension of most international travel. incoming data were consistent with a sharp slowdown in foreign economic growth in the first quarter, following a tightening of social-distancing restrictions to contain new waves of covid-19 infections. nevertheless, the slowdown appeared less severe than observed declines in mobility would have suggested, underscoring that foreign economies continued to adapt to public health restrictions. the most recent indicators showed that economic activity in many advanced foreign economies (afes) resumed expanding toward the end of the first quarter amid a partial easing of restrictions. however, a new surge in infections in several countries in latin america and south asia, notably india, underscored the fragility of the global recovery. foreign headline inflation rose considerably, boosted by temporary factors, such as the fading effects of steep price declines seen early last year and the pass-through of price increases for oil and other commodities. however, underlying inflationary pressures appeared to have remained muted. staff review of the financial situation investor sentiment improved over the intermeeting period, reflecting a pickup in the pace of vaccinations, prospects for infrastructure spending, and stronger-than-expected labor market and retail sales data. domestic equity prices increased notably amid declining equity market volatility, and corporate bond spreads narrowed. the nominal treasury yield curve was little changed, as were measures of inflation compensation. a straight read of overnight index swap quotes suggested that the expected path for the federal funds rate was little changed over the intermeeting period and that the expected policy rate would remain below 25 basis points until the first quarter of 2023. market-based financing conditions remained accommodative, and bank lending conditions eased markedly. despite recent improvements, lending standards for commercial and industrial (c&i) and consumer loans remained tighter than prepandemic levels. broad stock price indexes increased over the intermeeting period, with outperformance by technology stocks and stocks sensitive to consumer discretionary spending. one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500— the vix—declined, approaching the median level observed in the decade before the pandemic. spreads of yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds over comparable-maturity treasury yields narrowed moderately. spreads on municipal bonds were little changed, with yields on such bonds remaining close to their lowest levels in more than 20 years. domestic short-term funding markets remained stable. funding rates stayed very low against the backdrop of continued paydowns in treasury bills and substantial increases in reserve balances stemming from federal reserve asset purchases as well as the drawdown in balances maintained in the treasury general account associated with stimulus payments and other fiscal outlays. assets under management increased somewhat for government money market funds (mmfs) but declined slightly for prime mmfs. the weighted average maturity of government and prime mmfs remained elevated. the effective federal funds rate and the sofr were little changed, averaging 7 basis points and 1 basis point, respectively, over the intermeeting period. there continued to be no participation in the fed’s repo operations. participation in the fed’s reverse repo facility increased from minimal levels to an average of $47 billion and reached $134 billion on the quarter-end date. factors that had stressed foreign financial markets earlier this year—rising u.s. interest rates, resurging covid-19 cases, and renewed lockdowns in a number of countries—appeared less concerning to global investors over the intermeeting period. most afe equity indexes rose modestly, and most afe sovereign bond yields were little changed. in emerging market economies (emes), market optimism was tempered in part by rising covid-19 cases. the broad eme equity price  minutes of the meeting of april 27–28, 2021 page 7 index was little changed, while credit spreads widened somewhat in the most vulnerable emes. after robust inflows earlier this year, flows into eme-dedicated funds continued at a moderate pace. the broad dollar index fell modestly. financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses in capital markets remained highly accommodative over the intermeeting period, as reflected in low corporate bond yields and high price-to-earnings ratios in equity markets. gross corporate bond issuance and gross leveraged loan issuance were robust in february and march. equity raised through traditional initial public offerings (ipos) and seasoned equity offerings, as well as through special purpose acquisition companies, continued to be substantial in march. c&i loans outstanding at banks expanded in february and march after contracting for more than half a year. in the april senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported easing standards, on net, for c&i loans across firms of all sizes over the first quarter. banks also reported that demand for c&i loans weakened at large and middle-market firms and was basically unchanged at small firms. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations showed further signs of improvement for lower-rated firms. following a modest uptick in february, the volume of nonfinancial corporate bond downgrades spiked in march, but the spike reflected the downgrades of a few large and highly rated investment-grade firms. in contrast, for speculative-grade issuers, the volume of upgrades modestly exceeded that of downgrades in february and march. nonfinancial corporate bond defaults remained at low levels in february and march. market indicators of future default expectations were little changed and stayed low. financing conditions in the municipal bond market remained accommodative over the intermeeting period. issuance of municipal bonds was strong in march, and indicators of the credit quality of municipal debt were little changed in february and march. financing conditions for small businesses appeared to have improved, with demand for loans remaining subdued. likely in part because of the paycheck protection program, small business loan originations rose notably in february, the most recent month for which data were available, and were close to pre-pandemic levels. however, even amid improving financing conditions, many small businesses remained under financial stress. for commercial real estate (cre) financed through capital markets, financing conditions remained accommodative over the intermeeting period. although overall delinquency rates in agency commercial mortgagebacked securities (cmbs) declined in the past few months, delinquency rates on hotel and retail mortgages in cmbs pools remained high. cre loans held by banks were little changed in march. in the april sloos, changes in lending standards over the first quarter were mixed across cre loan categories. financing conditions in the residential mortgage market were little changed over the intermeeting period and remained accommodative for stronger borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. credit remained tight for borrowers with lower credit scores. mortgage rates for most borrowers were little changed on net. in the april sloos, banks reported easing standards on most types of mortgages. the share of mortgages in forbearance declined slightly in march. financing conditions in consumer credit markets generally remained accommodative for borrowers with strong credit scores but tight for those with subprime scores. consumer loans grew at a robust pace in february, reflecting the continued expansion of auto loans and a partial rebound in credit card account balances. banks in the april sloos reported easing auto lending standards in the first quarter but generally reported that standards remained tight compared with the end of 2019, especially for nonprime borrowers. banks also reported that standards on credit cards eased over the first quarter of 2021 but were generally still tighter than before the pandemic. interest rates offered to nonprime borrowers continued to rise through february, with the fraction of these offers with zero introductory rates continuing to decline. the staff provided an update on its assessments of the stability of the financial system. the staff noted that corporate bond spreads had declined notably since late last year and were at the lower ends of their historical distributions. in addition, measures of the equity risk premium declined further, and nonprice measures, such as high ipo volume, also indicated elevated investor appetite for risk in the equity market. valuation pressures for cre remained high, although information related to cre continued to be noisier than usual due to pandemic-induced declines in transactions. house price growth increased further, with house prices outpacing rents. in contrast, vulnerabilities from both household and business debt had diminished, reflecting continued  page 8 federal open market committee government support, a slower pace of business borrowing, and improving business earnings, although many households and businesses continued to struggle. regarding financial leverage, the staff noted that bank capital ratios remained above pre-pandemic levels in the fourth quarter, but risks remained. leverage among hedge funds was elevated and increased in the third quarter of last year for the most highly leveraged funds. leverage in hedge funds’ prime brokerage accounts rose notably through the fourth quarter of last year, reflecting elevated hedge fund leverage related to their stock market activities. the staff highlighted recent episodes underlining the opacity of risk exposures among some leveraged entities. with regard to funding risks, the staff noted that mmfs and open-end mutual funds faced significant structural vulnerabilities associated with liquidity transformation. assets under management at mmfs declined during the second half of 2020, while open-end mutual fund holdings of corporate bonds rose during the second half of last year. staff economic outlook the u.s. economic projection prepared by the staff for the april fomc meeting was slightly stronger than the march forecast. real gdp growth was projected to post a substantial increase this year, with a correspondingly rapid decline in the unemployment rate, as further reductions in social distancing and favorable financial conditions were expected to support output growth. with the boost to growth from continued reductions in social distancing assumed to fade after 2021, gdp growth was expected to step down in 2022 and 2023. however, with monetary policy assumed to remain highly accommodative, the staff continued to anticipate that real gdp growth would outpace that of potential over much of this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels. the staff’s outlook for inflation was broadly unchanged. the 12-month changes in total and core pce prices were expected to move above 2 percent in coming months as the unusually low readings from the spring of 2020 dropped out of the calculation window and as a recent jump in consumer energy prices pushed up the total measure. core inflation was expected to ease some later in the year but to remain above 2 percent at the end of 2021, boosted by large increases in import prices, a recovery in prices that had been especially affected by the pandemic, and the temporary effects of supply bottlenecks. inflation was then projected to dip slightly below 2 percent in 2022 as the influence of these transitory factors diminished, before returning to 2 percent by the end of 2023, supported by sustained tight levels of resource utilization in labor and product markets. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside and that the uncertainty around the forecast was elevated. in particular, despite the demonstrated resilience of the economy to surges in the pandemic over the past year, the possibility that covid-19 variants that were more contagious or more resistant to existing vaccines would spread posed a salient downside risk. the staff continued to view the risks around the inflation projection as balanced. on the upside, bottlenecks, supply disruptions, and historically high rates of resource utilization were seen as potential sources of greater-thanexpected inflationary pressures. alternatively, the possibility that inflation would be held down by low underlying trend inflation and a weaker-than-expected response to resource utilization was seen as an important downside risk. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. amid progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had strengthened. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remained weak but had shown improvement. inflation had risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants noted that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. the ongoing public health crisis continued to weigh on the economy, and risks to the economic outlook remained. participants observed that economic activity had picked up sharply this year, with robust gains in consumer spending, housing-sector activity, business equipment investment, and manufacturing production. they noted that the acceleration in economic activity reflected positive developments associated with the rapid pace of vaccinations as well as continued support from fiscal and monetary policies. nevertheless, participants generally noted that the economy remained far from the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. in their discussion of the household sector, participants remarked that indicators of consumer spending surged  minutes of the meeting of april 27–28, 2021 page 9 in march and expected that further gains in spending would contribute significantly to the economic recovery. many participants commented that fiscal stimulus, accommodative financial conditions, the release of pentup demand, progress on widespread vaccination, and the ongoing reduction of social-distancing measures were important factors supporting spending. many participants also noted that consumer spending would continue to be bolstered by these factors as well as by the elevated level of accumulated household savings. several participants observed that housing market activity continued to be strong, supported in part by low interest rates. with respect to the business sector, participants noted that business equipment investment continued to rise at a robust pace and manufacturing activity was expanding at a strong clip. that said, many participants discussed reports of shortages of materials and labor as well as supply chain bottlenecks as likely restraints to the pace of recovery in manufacturing and other business sectors. many participants also noted that their district contacts had reported a pickup in activity in the leisure, travel, and hospitality sectors. those contacts had grown increasingly optimistic about overall business conditions, given ongoing progress on vaccinations, easing of restrictions on in-person activities, and substantial fiscal support. a couple of participants reported improved conditions in the agricultural sector, with farmers’ income supported by higher crop prices and federal aid payments. participants commented on the continued improvement in labor market conditions in recent months. job gains in the march employment report were strong, and the unemployment rate fell to 6.0 percent. even so, participants judged that the economy was far from achieving the committee’s broad-based and inclusive maximumemployment goal. payroll employment was 8.4 million jobs below its pre-pandemic level. some participants noted that the labor market recovery continued to be uneven across demographic and income groups and across sectors. many participants also remarked that business contacts in their districts reported having trouble hiring workers, likely reflecting factors such as early retirements, health concerns, childcare responsibilities, and expanded unemployment insurance benefits. many participants noted as well that these factors were depressing the labor force participation rate, relative to its pre-pandemic level. some of these factors were seen as likely to remain significant while pandemic-related risks persisted. based on reports from business contacts, some participants noted that the step-up in demand for labor had started to put some upward pressure on wages. moreover, over the medium term, participants expected labor market conditions to continue to improve, supported by accommodative fiscal and monetary policies as well as continued progress on vaccinations, unwinding of social distancing, and the associated recovery in economic activity. a couple of participants remarked that businesses in industries severely affected by the pandemic were downsizing or that some businesses were focused on cutting costs or increasing productivity, particularly through automation. in their comments about inflation, participants anticipated that inflation as measured by the 12-month change of the pce price index would move above 2 percent in the near term as very low readings from early in the pandemic fall out of the calculation. in addition, increases in oil prices were expected to pass through to consumer energy prices. participants also noted that the expected surge in demand as the economy reopens further, along with some transitory supply chain bottlenecks, would contribute to pce price inflation temporarily running somewhat above 2 percent. after the transitory effects of these factors fade, participants generally expected measured inflation to ease. looking further ahead, participants expected inflation to be at levels consistent with achieving the committee’s objectives over time. a number of participants remarked that supply chain bottlenecks and input shortages may not be resolved quickly and, if so, these factors could put upward pressure on prices beyond this year. they noted that in some industries, supply chain disruptions appeared to be more persistent than originally anticipated and reportedly had led to higher input costs. despite the expected short-run fluctuations in measured inflation, many participants commented that various measures of longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored at levels broadly consistent with achieving the committee’s longer-run goals. participants judged that uncertainty was elevated and that the outlook was highly dependent on the course of the virus. amid considerable progress on vaccinations, the unwinding of social distancing, and strong policy support, participants assessed that risks to the outlook were no longer as elevated as in previous months. nevertheless, some participants remarked that the pandemic continued to pose downside risks to the economic outlook and noted the potential for an uneven recovery in light of new virus strains and potential hesitancy regarding vaccination. as upside risks, some participants mentioned that the release of pent-up demand, accumulated excess household savings, and rapid progress on vaccinations, amid continued fiscal and monetary support,  page 10 federal open market committee could boost economic activity and bring individuals back into the labor force more quickly than currently expected. some participants mentioned upside risks around the inflation outlook that could arise if temporary factors influencing inflation turned out to be more persistent than expected. participants who commented on financial stability agreed that the financial sector had shown resilience during the pandemic, in large part reflecting strong policy support. some remarked that the capital positions and loan loss reserves at large banks remained high, and earnings were strong. a few participants noted that vulnerabilities from both business and household debt were at a moderate level. nevertheless, a couple of participants highlighted that forbearance programs instituted in response to the pandemic could be masking vulnerabilities among households and businesses. regarding asset valuations, several participants noted that risk appetite in capital markets was elevated, as equity valuations had risen further, ipo activity remained high, and risk spreads on corporate bonds were at the bottom of their historical distribution. a couple of participants remarked that, should investor risk appetite fall, an associated drop in asset prices coupled with high business and financial leverage could have adverse implications for the real economy. a number of participants commented on valuation pressures being somewhat elevated in the housing market. some participants mentioned the potential risks to the financial system stemming from the activities of hedge funds and other leveraged investors, commenting on the limited visibility into the activities of these entities or on the prudential risk-management practices of dealers’ prime-brokerage businesses. some participants highlighted potential vulnerabilities in other parts of the financial system, including run-prone investment funds in short-term funding and credit markets. various participants commented on the prolonged period of low interest rates and highly accommodative financial market conditions and the possibility for these conditions to lead to reach-for-yield behavior that could raise financial stability risks. in their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the federal reserve’s commitment to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. participants agreed that the economy was still far from the committee’s longer-run goals. moreover, the path ahead continued to depend on the course of the virus, and risks to the economic outlook remained. consequently, participants judged that the current stance of policy and policy guidance remained appropriate to foster further economic recovery as well as to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations that continue to be well anchored at 2 percent. participants judged that the committee’s current guidance for the federal funds rate and asset purchases was serving the economy well. participants also noted that the existing outcome-based guidance implied that the path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet would depend on actual progress toward reaching the committee’s maximum-employment and inflation goals. in particular, some participants emphasized that an important feature of the outcome-based guidance was that policy would be set based on observed progress toward the committee’s goals, not on uncertain economic forecasts. however, a couple of participants commented on the risks of inflation pressures building up to unwelcome levels before they become sufficiently evident to induce a policy reaction. in their discussion of the federal reserve’s asset purchases, various participants noted that it would likely be some time until the economy had made substantial further progress toward the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals relative to the conditions prevailing in december 2020 when the committee first provided its guidance for asset purchases. consistent with the committee’s outcome-based guidance, purchases would continue at least at the current pace until that time. many participants highlighted the importance of the committee clearly communicating its assessment of progress toward its longer-run goals well in advance of the time when it could be judged substantial enough to warrant a change in the pace of asset purchases. the timing of such communications would depend on the evolution of the economy and the pace of progress toward the committee’s goals. a number of participants suggested that if the economy continued to make rapid progress toward the committee’s goals, it might be appropriate at some point in upcoming meetings to begin discussing a plan for adjusting the pace of asset purchases. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that the covid-19 pandemic was causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. they noted that amid progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had strengthened. although the sectors most  minutes of the meeting of april 27–28, 2021 page 11 adversely affected by the pandemic remained weak, they had shown improvement. inflation had risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members also remarked that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. in addition, members agreed that the ongoing public health crisis continued to weigh on the economy and risks to the economic outlook remained. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. all members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. members expected to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until those outcomes were achieved. all members agreed to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, members agreed that it would be appropriate for the federal reserve to continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress had been made toward the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. they judged that these asset purchases would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. members agreed that the postmeeting statement should acknowledge that indicators of economic activity and employment had strengthened but that, despite showing improvement, the sectors of the economy most affected by the pandemic remained weak. members also judged that, while risks to the outlook remained, continued progress on vaccinations and accommodative monetary and fiscal policies most likely would underpin further gains in economic activity and employment and would limit risks to the outlook. as a result, they agreed to remove the characterization of risks as “considerable” in the fomc statement. with regard to the characterization of inflation, members agreed that the statement should note that inflation had risen but that the increase largely reflected transitory factors. they noted that inflation as measured by the 12-month change of the pce price index was expected to move above 2 percent as the very low readings from early in the pandemic fell out of the calculation and as past increases in oil prices passed through to consumer energy prices. the expected rebound in spending as the economy continued to reopen was also likely to boost inflation temporarily, particularly if supply bottlenecks limited how quickly production could respond to demand in the near term. however, members also viewed these increases in prices as likely to have only transitory effects on inflation. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective april 29, 2021, the federal open market committee directs the desk to:  undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent.  increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) by $40 billion per month.  increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts  page 12 federal open market committee and purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities.  conduct repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets.  conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.00 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $80 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs.  allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. the covid-19 pandemic is causing tremendous human and economic hardship across the united states and around the world. amid progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have strengthened. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak but have shown improvement. inflation has risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy will depend significantly on the course of the virus, including progress on vaccinations. the ongoing public health crisis continues to weigh on the economy, and risks to the economic outlook remain. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation running persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer‑term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. the committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, the federal reserve will continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage‑backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. these asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, thomas i. barkin, raphael w. bostic, michelle  minutes of the meeting of april 27–28, 2021 page 13 w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, mary c. daly, charles l. evans, randal k. quarles, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to leave the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances at 0.10 percent. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective april 29, 2021. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, june 15– 16, 2021. the meeting adjourned at 10:20 a.m. on april 28, 2021. notation vote by notation vote completed on april 6, 2021, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on march 16–17, 2021.  james a. clouse secretary 
une 16, 2021 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. today the federal open market committee kept interest rates near zero and maintained our asset purchases. these measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to deliver powerful support to the economy until the recovery is complete. widespread vaccinations, along with unprecedented fiscal policy actions, are also providing strong support to the recovery. indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen, and real gdp this year appears to be on track to post its fastest rate of increase in decades. much of this rapid growth reflects the continued bounceback in activity from depressed levels. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak but have shown improvement. household spending is rising at a rapid pace, boosted by the ongoing reopening of the economy, fiscal support, and accommodative financial conditions. the housing sector is strong, and business investment is increasing at a solid pace. in some industries, near- term supply constraints are restraining activity. forecasts from fomc participants for economic growth this year have been revised up since our march summary of economic projections. even so, the recovery is incomplete, and risks to the economic outlook remain. as with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve, although the pace of improvement has been uneven. employment rose 419,000 per month, on average, in april and may, with the leisure and hospitality sector continuing to post notable gains. employment in this sector and the economy as a whole remains well below pre-  pandemic levels. the unemployment rate remained elevated in may at 5.8 percent, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs, ongoing fears of the virus, and unemployment insurance payments, appear to be weighing on employment growth. these factors should wane in coming months against a backdrop of rising vaccinations, leading to more rapid gains in employment. looking ahead, fomc participants project the labor market to continue to improve, with the median projection for the unemployment rate standing at 4.5 percent at the end of this year and declining to 3.5 percent by the end of 2023. the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. in particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower-wage workers in the service sector and on african americans and hispanics. inflation has increased notably in recent months. the 12-month change in pce prices was 3.6 percent in april and will likely remain elevated in coming months before moderating. part of the increase reflects the very low readings from early in the pandemic falling out of the calculation as well as the pass-through of past increases in oil prices to, to consumer energy prices. beyond these effects, we are also seeing upward pressure on prices from the rebound in spending as the economy continues to reopen, particularly as supply bottlenecks have limited how quickly production in some sectors can respond in the near term. these bottleneck effects have been larger than anticipated, and fomc participants have revised up their projections for, for inflation notably for this year. as these transitory supply effects abate, inflation is expected  to drop back toward our longer-run goal, and the median inflation projection falls from 3.4 percent this year to 2.1 percent next year and 2.2 percent in 2023. the process of reopening the economy is unprecedented, as was the shutdown at the onset of the pandemic. as the reopening continues, shifts in demand can be large and rapid, and bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other constraints could continue to limit how quickly supply can adjust, raising the possibility that inflation could turn out to be higher and more persistent than we expect. our new framework for monetary policy emphasizes the importance of having well-anchored inflation expectations, both to foster price stability and to enhance our ability to promote our broad-based and inclusive maximum-employment goal. indicators of longer-term inflation expectations have generally reversed the declines seen earlier in the pandemic and have moved into a range that appears broadly consistent with our longer-run inflation goal of 2 percent. if we saw signs that the path of inflation or longer-term inflation expectations were moving materially and persistently beyond levels consistent with our goal, we’d be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy. the pandemic continues to pose risks to the economic outlook. progress on vaccinations has limited the spread of covid-19 and will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy. however, the pace of vaccinations has slowed, and new strains of the virus remain a risk. continued progress on vaccinations will support a return to more normal economic conditions. the fed’s policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. as the committee reiterated in today’s policy statement, with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation  moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. with regard to interest rates, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. as is evident in the sep, many participants forecast that these favorable economic conditions will be met somewhat sooner than previously projected; the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate now lies above the effective lower bound in 2023. of course, these projections do not represent a committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a couple of years from now. more important than any forecast is the fact that, whenever liftoff comes, policy will remain highly accommodative. reaching the conditions for liftoff will mainly signal that the recovery is strong and no longer requires holding rates near zero. in addition, we are continuing to increase—continuing to increase our holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. the increase in our balance sheet since march 2020 has materially eased financial conditions and is providing substantial support to the economy.  at our meeting that concluded earlier today, the committee had a discussion on the progress made toward our goals since the committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last december. while reaching the standard of “substantial further progress” is still a ways off, participants expect that progress will continue. in coming meetings, the committee will continue to assess the economy’s progress toward our goals. as we have said, we will provide advance notice before announcing any decision to make changes to our purchases. on a final note, we made a technical adjustment today to the federal reserve’s administered rates. the ioer and overnight rrp rates were adjusted upward by 5 basis points in order to keep the federal funds rate well within the target range and to support smooth functioning in money markets. this technical adjustment has no bearing on the appropriate path for the federal funds rate or stance of monetary policy. to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. rachel siegel, the washington post. rachel siegel. thank you, michelle, and thank you, chair powell, for taking our questions. i’m wondering if you can walk us through expectations you have, specifically when it comes to the labor market going into 2023. and i’m curious about people who may have left the labor market, who have yet to come back, or who may face issues with childcare. perhaps they’ve retired early. any barriers that you see in keeping people from the labor market as you consider full employment going into 2023? thank you.  chair powell. thank you. so i would say, if you look at the labor market and you look at the demand for workers and the level of job creation and think ahead, i think it’s clear, and i am confident, that we are on a path to a very strong labor market—a labor market that, that shows low unemployment, high participation, rising wages for people across the spectrum. i mean, i think that’s, that’s shown in our projections, it’s shown in outside projections. and if you look through the current time frame and think one and two years out, we’re going to be looking at a very, very strong labor market. in terms of exactly what that means, we’ll, we’ll have to see how things evolve. i think we learned during the course of the last very long expansion, the longest in our history, that labor supply during a long expansion can exceed expectations, can move above its estimated trend. and, and i have no reason to think that that won’t happen again. at the same time, we have seen—in terms of participation, we’ve seen a significant number of, of people retire. and so we, we don’t actually know exactly what labor force participation will be as we go forward, but i, i would tend to, to look at it and think that it—that it can return to high levels, although it may take some time to do that. but overall, this is—this is going to be, you know, a very strong labor market. in terms of the near term, you ask as well—so we see a couple of things, a few things that seem likely to be holding back labor supply. there are very large amounts of job openings, and there are a very large number of people who, who are unemployed. and the pace of, of filling those jobs is—somehow feels slower than it might be. so i’d point to a number of things, the first of which is just that most of the, the act of sort of going back to one’s old job—that’s kind of already happened. so this is a question of people finding a new job. and that’s just a process that takes longer. there may be something of a speed limit on it. you’ve got to find a job  where, where your skills match what, you know, what, what the employer wants. it’s got to be in the right area. there’s just a lot that goes into the function of finding a job. so that’s, that’s sort of a natural thing. in addition, i would say that we, we look at, for example, a, a significant number of people still say that they’re concerned about going back to work in jobs where there’s a lot of public facing because of—because of covid. so that’s clearly holding back some people, and that should diminish as vaccinations move ahead. there’s also the question of childcare. many are engaged in, in caretaking. and as schools reopen and, and, and childcare/daycare centers open in the fall—in the fall, then we should see—we should see that supporting labor force participation by caretakers. finally, unemployment insurance for something like 15 million people will either end or be diminished as we move through the summer and into, into, into the fall by the end of september, and i’d like some—that may also encourage some to go back in and take jobs. so you would think that that would add to an increase in job creation as well. so you put all those together, i would expect that we would see strong job creation building up over the summer and going into—going into the fall. i will also say, though, the last thing i’ll say is, this is an extraordinarily unusual time. and we, we really don’t have a template or, or, you know, any experience of, of a situation like this. and so i think we have to be humble about our ability to understand the data. it’s not a time to try to reach hard conclusions about the labor market, about inflation, about the path of policy. we need to see more data. we need to be a little bit patient. and i do think, though, that we’ll, we’ll, we’ll be seeing some things coming up in coming months that will—that will inform our, our thinking.  michelle smith. thank you. paul kiernan. paul kiernan. hi, chairman powell. thanks for the question. your—the committee’s median forecast on inflation seems to assume a pretty, pretty tame outlook for the rest of the year. as you know, the three-month annualized rate for the past three months was, i think, 8.4 percent in the cpi. and i’m just wondering sort of how much longer we can sustain those, those kinds of rates before you get nervous. thanks. chair powell. so inflation has come in above expectations over the last few months. but if you look behind the headline numbers, you’ll see that the incoming data are, are consistent with the view that prices—that prices that are driving that higher inflation are from categories that are being directly affected by the recovery from the pandemic and the reopening of the economy. so, for example, the experience with, with lumber prices is, is illustrative of this. the thought is that prices like that that have moved up really quickly because of the shortages and bottlenecks and the like, they should stop going up, and at some point, they, they, in some cases, should actually go down. and we did see that in the case of lumber. another example where we haven’t seen that yet is prices for used cars, which accounted for more than a third of the total increase in core inflation. used car prices are going up because of sort of a perfect storm of very strong demand and limited supply. it’s going up at just an amazing annual rate. but we do think that it makes sense that that would stop, and that in fact it would reverse over time. so we think we’ll be seeing some of that. when will we be seeing it? we’re not sure. that narrative seems, still seems quite likely to prove correct, although, you know, as i pointed out at the last press conference, the, the timing of that is, is pretty uncertain, and so are the, the effects in the near term. but over time, it seems  likely that these very specific things that are driving up inflation will be—will be temporary. and we’ll be, you know, we’re going to be looking. we’ll be looking at the monthly pricing data. i’ll, i’ll also say that the labor market is going to be important, both for the maximum- employment goal, but also for inflation. and we’ll be looking at that. and, and as i—as i mentioned, we expect and i expect that we’ll see increases in supply over coming months as the factors that we believe have been suppressing supply abate, wane, move down. so i, i can’t give you an exact number or an exact time, but i would say that we do expect inflation to move down. if you look at the—if you look at the forecast for 2021 and—sorry, 2022 and 2023 among my colleagues on the, on the federal open market committee, you will see that people do expect inflation to move down meaningfully toward our goal. and i think the full range of, of, of inflation projections for 2023 falls between 2 and 2.3 percent, which is consistent with our—with our goals. michelle smith. thank you. now we’ll go to ylan mui at cnbc. ylan mui. hi. thank you, chair powell, for doing this. my question for you is that you mentioned that your colleagues did have a discussion about the progress that you’re making toward your, your goals in order to consider tapering your asset purchases. in that discussion, you said that you didn’t—haven’t made substantial progress yet, but that you expect to continue to make progress. in that discussion, did you guys talk about a timeline for when you expect to see that progress be made and when you might consider starting to reduce those purchases? chair powell. right. so i, i expect that we’ll be able to say more about timing as we see more data. basically, there’s not a lot of more light i can—i can shed on that. but you can think of this meeting that we had as the “talking about talking about” meeting, if you like. and i now suggest that we retire that term, which has—which has served its purpose well, i  think. so committee participants were of the view that since we adopted that guidance in december, the economy has clearly made progress, although we are still a ways from our goal of substantial further progress. participants expect continued progress ahead toward that objective. and assuming that is the case, it will be appropriate to consider announcing a plan for reducing our asset purchases at a future meeting. so at coming meetings, the committee will continue to assess the economy’s progress toward our goals, and we’ll give advance notice before announcing any decision. the timing, of course, ylan, will depend on the pace of that progress and not on any calendar. michelle smith. thank you. now we’ll go to chris rugaber, ap. chris rugaber. right. thank you. well, you mentioned—let me ask about inflation expectations. you said they were—i think you mentioned in your opening statement that you saw them as within target. does that mean that some of the shorter-term measures we’ve seen out there such as the new york federal reserve’s three-year outlook, which jumped a bit—should those sort of be dismissed? and are we only looking at longer-term inflation expectations? and would you describe those as still well anchored at this point? and on a related note, would the fed consider publishing its index of common inflation expectations on a monthly basis? thank you. chair powell. so we, we do tend to look at the longer-term inflation expectations, because that’s really, we think, what matters for, for inflation. so and, and, you know, the shorter-term ones do tend to move around based on, for example, gasoline prices. so you’ll see if gasoline prices were to spike, you’ll see the shorter-term inflation expectation measures, particularly the surveys, move up. and, and that’s, that’s maybe not a good signal for future inflation if, if gas happens to spike and then go back down again.  so we—yes, i think if, if you look at the broad range of longer-term inflation expectations, they’ve moved up. they moved down during the beginning of the pandemic, you know, sort of further exacerbating concerns that we might find ourselves where, for example, the ecb and the bank of japan have been, where you have expectations and inflation itself sliding down and you have a really hard time stopping that process once it begins. so that was a concern. so it’s, it’s good, actually, to see inflation—longer-term inflation expectations move back up to a range—it’s a range that’s consistent with what our objectives are. these are not precise measures, and that’s—and they, they contain risk premiums of various kinds. and that’s why we look at a broad range of them and tend to look at the movement of that broad range of, of, of indicators, which are from, you know, surveys of economists, surveys of the public, and also market based. it’s, it’s, it’s a wide index, as i’m sure you know. we look at that, and we see them back in the range where they were. and, by the way, they’ve been broadly higher than that, somewhat modestly higher than that, not so many years ago, at a time when inflation was, was, was still anchored at around 2 percent or maybe even a little bit below. so the answer is, yes, i think they are anchored and they’re at a good place right now. it’s gratifying to see them having moved up off of their pandemic lows. and, you know, as you know, it’s, it’s fundamental in our framework, our new framework, to, to assure that inflation—longer-term inflation expectations are anchored at a place that is consistent with our goal. we, we think that’s an important reason. if, if inflation expectations are not anchored at a place that’s consistent with your goal, it’s not clear why you would expect to hit your goal over the longer term. so it’s important. michelle smth. okay, now we’ll go to james politi with the ft.  james politi. chair powell—thanks, chair powell. your economic projections today forecast 7 percent growth in 2022, unemployment at 4½ percent, and core inflation of 3 percent. if those conditions are achieved by the end of the year, would that constitute substantial further progress, in your mind? and kind of more broadly, when you look at the sort of median forecast for interest rates in 2023 showing not one but two interest rate increases at the time, i mean, is this kind of—can you describe the sort of tone of the—of the discussion in the committee? and are we really moving towards sort of a post-pandemic stance? is there greater confidence that, you know, the recovery will be, you know, a full recovery sooner than expected? chair powell. on your first question, the judgment of when we have arrived at substantial further progress is one that the committee will make. and it would not be appropriate for me to lay out particular numbers that do or do not—that do or do not qualify. that is—that is, you know, the process that we’re beginning now at the next meeting. we will begin, meeting by meeting, to, to assess that progress and talk about what we—what we think we’re seeing and, and just do all of the things that you do to sort of clarify your thinking around the process of deciding whether and how to adjust the pace and composition of asset purchases. in terms of the, the, the two hikes—so let me say a couple things first of all, not for the first time, about the—about the dot plot. these are, of course, individual projections. they’re not a committee forecast, they’re not a plan. and we did not actually have a discussion of whether liftoff is appropriate at any particular year, because discussing liftoff now would be— would be highly premature, wouldn’t make any sense. if you look at the transcripts from five years ago, you’ll see that sometimes people mention their rate path in their interventions. often they don’t. and the last thing to say is, the dots are not a great forecaster of, of future rate  moves. and that’s not because—it’s just because it’s so highly uncertain. there is no great forecaster of, of future dots. so, so dots to be taken with a—with a big, big grain of salt. however, so let me talk about this, this, this meeting. the committee spelled out, as you know, in our fomc statements the conditions that it expects to see before an adjustment in the target range is made. and it’s outcome based, it’s not time based. and, as i mentioned, it’s labor market conditions consistent with maximum employment, inflation at 2 percent and on track to exceed 2 percent. in the projections, it gives some sense of how participants see the economy evolving in their most likely case. and, honestly, the main message i would take away from the sep is that participants—many, many participants are more comfortable that the economic conditions in the committee’s forward guidance will be met somewhat sooner than previously anticipated. and that would be a welcome development. if such outcomes materialize, it means the economy will have made faster progress toward our goals. so the other thing i’ll say is, rate increases are really not at all the focus of the committee. the focus of the committee is the current state of the economy. but in terms of our tools, it’s about asset purchases. that’s what we’re thinking about. liftoff is, is well into the future. the conditions for liftoff—we’re very far from maximum employment, for example. it’s, it’s a consideration for the future. so the near-term thing is really—the real near-term discussion, discussion that will begin is really about the, the path of asset purchases. and, as i mentioned, we had a discussion about that today and expect to, in future meetings, continue to think about our progress. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to nancy marshall-genzer from marketplace.  nancy marshall-genzer. continuing—chair powell, continuing in that vein, when you’re ready, how will you go about signaling the start of tapering when you do decide to do that? chair powell. so our intention for this process is that it will be orderly, methodical, and transparent. and i can just tell you, we, we, we see real value in communicating well in advance what our thinking is. and we’ll try to be clear. and, as i mentioned, we’ll, we’ll give advance notice before announcing a decision to taper. and so all i can say is that we, we think it’s important—we think where the balance sheet’s concerned, a lot of notice, as much transparency as we can give, and as far—as far in advance as we can to give people a chance to adjust their expectations. and, you know, we expect to be in that business until we reach substantial further progress and then have a—have a decision. again, i have nothing further on time. it wouldn’t be appropriate to say. we’re going to have to see more data. we’re a ways away from substantial further progress, we think. but we’re making progress. nancy marshall-genzer. so you can’t say generally how far in advance you would signal? chair powell. again, as we—as we approach that goal, we’ll provide, you know, as much clarity as we can. michelle smith. great, thank you. going to craig torres at bloomberg. craig torres. craig torres at bloomberg. if i were a businessman looking at the forecast today, i would ask how and when the fed seeks to achieve an average of 2 percent inflation. in other words, does the fomc have a look-back period? or does it plan to suppress inflation in outer years because, over the next three years, you’re going to be above inflation? so what is your look-back period? does the committee have one? and if not, why not? and if  they don’t, why isn’t this just flexible inflation targeting without an average in a range of 2 to 2¼ percent? thanks. chair powell. you know, so as part of our year-and-a-half-long process, the review that we did and came out with at the end of that with the—with the new statement on longer- run goals and monetary policy strategy, we looked carefully at the idea. we’ve all read all the literature around different formulas for makeup and things like that. and we concluded—and, you know, i strongly agree—that it’s not wise to, to wed yourself to a particular formulation of that. so we did adopt a discretionary—there’s an element of discretion in it. you know, it says that we will seek to—seek inflation that runs moderately above 2 percent for some time. and it’s, it’s meant to create a broad sense that we want inflation to average 2 percent over time. and that under the old—under the old formula, under the old framework, what was happening was, 2 percent was a ceiling because all of the errors were below. you were always getting back to 2 percent. so you were bouncing back and forth between 1½ and 2, and we wanted them to be centered around 2. so, so that’s, that’s the approach that we’re taking. and you’re right, it’s not—it’s not a formulaic approach. we were clear on that when we announced the framework. was there another part of your question, craig? craig torres. that pretty much answers it, chair powell. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. now we’ll go to michael derby. michael derby. thanks for taking my question. so i wanted to ask you about the reverse repo usage that we’ve seen lately. i was curious if you are at all concerned about the level of money flowing into the reverse repo facility. and do you believe that the changes in the fed’s rate control toolkit today will have any impact on that? and then, in a related question, do  you think that fed asset purchases are taking too many safe assets out of the market right now and creating maybe some dislocations in the money markets? chair powell. so on the—on the facility, we think it’s doing its job. we think it’s doing—the reverse repo facility is, is doing what it’s supposed to do, which is to provide a floor under money market rates and keep the federal funds rate well within its—well within its range. so we’re not concerned with it. it’s doing—you have an unusual situation where the treasury general account is, is shrinking and bill supply is shrinking. and so there’s, there’s downward pressure—we’re buying assets—there’s downward pressure on short-term rates, and that facility is, is doing what we think it’s supposed to do. sorry, your second question was again? michael derby. yeah, i mean, the change in the rate control toolkit, will that have any impact on—do you think that will reduce the, the amount of money coming into reverse repos? will that have any impact on money market conditions that, you know, beyond the fed funds rate setting? chair powell. it could have some impact. i think we’ll have to see empirically. but it’s designed to keep the federal funds rate, you know, within the range. and i do think it could have some effect on, on broader money market conditions below as it relates to, you know, the very low rates and the downward pressures. michael derby. and will it—do think it will lower uptake on the reverse repo facility, or that’s just not even really a focus of what the change was? chair powell. it’s not, honestly. and, you know, the funny thing, you would think that it would, but we’ll have to see. it’s, it’s possible that that would not be the case. that’s going to be an empirical question. michael derby. okay, cool. thank you.  michelle smith. we’ll go to jeanna smialek, the new york times. jeanna smialek. hey, chair powell. thank you for taking our questions. i was wondering if you could follow up a little bit on your response to rachel at the very beginning and talk a little bit about how we should understand what full employment means in a world that, as you mentioned, is pretty roiled. all the data is pretty—has been pretty roiled by the pandemic, and we’re not really sure where epop is going to settle in, we’re not sure where participation is going to settle in. and wages are already looking, you know, decent. so i guess i wonder what full employment means in this context and, and sort of how you’re thinking about those wage data. chair powell. yeah. as, as you well know, there isn’t one indicator we can look to, and there’s no one number that we can therefore point to. we look at a range of indicators, and it’s a very broad range, you can count to a high number just quickly—but, but, certainly, it will include things like unemployment and participation and wages and many different flavors of that. so how do we think about it? a couple of things. we’re all going to be informed by what we saw in the last cycle, which was labor supply outperforming expectations over a long period of time. now, that hadn’t happened in many other cycles, but this was a very long cycle. so we’re going to have to be alert to see whether that can happen again. it is a different—it’s a different economy. we, we have had a slew of retirements, and that may weigh on participation. that, that effect, though, should wear off in a few years and, and, you know, as you move through that window, because they would have—people would have retired anyway, and you’ll be back where you, you would have been. so i think we’re—i think that lesson number one is, is just to be careful about assessing maximum employment. and i think if you—during the last cycle, there were—there were waves of concern that we were reaching full employment as early,  you know, as, as 2012, when i arrived at the fed. and, you know—you know, nine years later— eight years later, we were still creating jobs. and, you know, it was quite remarkable. so we’re all going to be informed by that. at the same time, we understand this is a different economy. you know, the, the demographics are, people are getting older, and that should have a secular effect of, of reducing participation over time. so we have to be sensible about what, what can be done. but i think we’re going to be—we’re going to lean into that and be optimistic. you asked about wages. you know, we’re seeing wage increases. that’s, that’s sort of a natural thing to be seeing in a strong economy. and what we’re seeing is—we don’t see anything that’s troubling in the sense of—what would be troubling would be, you know, very wide across the economy, wages at unsustainable levels without high inflation. in other words, wages in excess of productivity and inflation, you know, by a meaningful amount broadly across the economy, sort of forcing companies to keep raising prices and getting into a wage–price cycle. that’s, that’s the old formula for—one of the old formulas for having high inflation. we don’t see anything like that now. we do see high wages. we see them for, for people who are mostly new, you know, entering into new jobs, many of them in low-skilled jobs. and, but we, we do think—you’ve got to—you’ve got to think in the labor market right now, where, where supply and demand are just not matched up well. and, you know, we think it’s a flexible economy and, and it will clear. there will—there will be a level at which supply and demand meet. and that’ll—we think that’ll, that’ll be happening in coming months. so—but the last thing i’ll say is, again, if you look at, at the forecasts, we are going to be in a very strong labor market pretty quickly here. there are still a big group of unemployed people. and, you know, we’re not going to forget about them. we’re going—we’re going to do everything we can to get people back into work and give them the chance to work. but there’s  every reason to think that we’ll be in a—in a labor market with very attractive numbers, with low unemployment, high participation, and rising wages across the spectrum. so that’s, that’s a little bit how we’re looking at the—at the labor market. michelle smith. thank you. now we’ll go to hannah lang at the american banker. hannah lang. hi, i wanted to ask about the status of your thinking around the supplementary leverage ratio right now. is the fed still thinking about ways to permanently adjust this to account for the high growth in deposits? and do you ultimately believe a permanent fix is needed? and any information on the timing around that would be—would be helpful. chair powell. what i can say is, we’re working on it. i don’t have anything to share with you in terms of the particulars or the timing right now, unfortunately. but we’ve, we’ve always—our position has been for a long time and, and it is now that we’d, we’d like the leverage ratio to be a backstop to risk-based capital requirements. when leverage requirements are, are, are binding, it does skew incentives for firms to substitute lower-risk assets for high-risk ones. it’s a straightforward thing. and because of the substantial increase in reserves, treasuries, and other safe assets in the banking system, the slr is rapidly ceasing to become— ceasing to be the intended backstop for big firms that we want it to be. so we do think it’s appropriate to consider ways to adapt it to this new high-reserves environment, and, and we’re looking hard at the issue. we would also, just to be really clear, we will take whatever actions are necessary to assure that any changes we do make or recommend do not erode the overall strength of bank capital requirements. sorry, i can’t give you any more. that’s just something we’re working on.  michelle smith. thank you. now we’ll go to anneken tappe at cnn business. anneken tappe. hi there. thanks for taking my question. chairman powell, the price jumps we’ve seen in some raw materials—lumber, for example, you mentioned that earlier—seem to be easing. and it looks like we’re at the beginning of suppliers catching up with demand. but i wonder if you’re worried at all, if we’re going to end up with excess supply immediately after those shortages wear off and if we just continue this mismatch, as we’re recovering and getting out of the pandemic economy. and i wonder how that would affect the fed’s outlook at all. chair powell. well, that is really not the problem we’re having right now. but— and, actually, people who work in commodity industries are very focused on that, because they know that, you know, they don’t want to build, build capacity and then find out that it’s not necessary. so, really, the problem now is, is that demand is very, very strong. incomes are high, people have money in their bank accounts. demand for goods is extremely high, and it hasn’t— it hasn’t come down. we’re seeing the service sector reopening. and so you’re seeing prices are moving back up off their lows there. but in terms of, of overcorrecting, i mean, i think there, there is a possibility on the other side of this that, that inflation could be—could actually be quite low going forward. but that’s not—that’s not really where our focus is right now. our focus right now is, we need to—our, our expectation is that these, these high inflation readings that we’re seeing now will start to abate. and that’s, that’s what we think. and it’ll be like the lumber experience, and like we expect the used car experience to be. with things like airplane tickets and hotels, which are the other two factors in the most recent cpi report that went up a lot, we expect that those prices will get back up to where they were, but there’s no reason to think that they’re going to keep going up  a lot. because if they are, people will build new hotels. there’s no reason for supply and demand to be out of whack in the hotel business over any period of time. so we think that’ll happen. i think in terms of the timing and the effects on inflation in the near term, there’s a lot of uncertainty. the overall story is one that, that we think is right, and we think the incoming data support it and, you know, so do many, many forecasters. and if you look at the forecasts on the fomc, you will—you will see that as well. but we don’t—we don’t in any way dismiss the chance that it can work out that, that this goes on longer than expected. and the risk would be that over time, it does begin to affect inflation expectations. and if we see inflation expectations and inflation—or inflation moving up in a way that is really materially above what we—what we would see as consistent with our goals, and persistently so, we wouldn’t hesitate to use our tools to address that. price stability is half of our mandate, and we would certainly do that. we do not expect that, though. that is not our base case. and, and in that we’re joined by many other forecasters, but there’s a lot to be humble about among forecasters. forecasters have a lot to be humble about. it’s a—it’s a highly uncertain business. and we’re, we’re very much attuned to the risks and, and watching the data carefully. in the meantime, i would say, you know, we should—as i mentioned earlier, there’s so much uncertainty around this. it’s, it’s just a unique situation that we need to see how things evolve in coming months and, and see how that story holds up and act accordingly. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to howard schneider at reuters. howard schneider. howard schneider, reuters. thanks, chair powell, for taking this. i don’t want to miss the moment here. and i just—i noticed that in the statement you dropped the language saying that the pandemic is weighing on the economy. so is this the  effective end, in your view, of the pandemic as a constraint on economic activity, even though it’s still cited as a risk? chair powell. you know, it’s a—it’s a continuum, right? what you’ve seen with the pandemic is sharply declining cases, hospitalizations, and deaths. and that’s great. and, and, you know, that should continue. but, you know, you, you also saw in the united kingdom, which has, i think, at least as high if not higher vaccination rates, they’ve had an outbreak of the delta variety. and it’s—and it’s causing them to have to—to have to react to that. so you’re not—you’re not out of the woods at this point. and it would be premature to—in my thinking, it would be premature to declare victory. vaccination still has a ways to go to get to levels—it would be good to see it get to a substantially higher level. and, you know, that can only help. so, look, i—but you’re right, the statement language is evolving. i would expect it to continue to evolve. there’s a lot of judgment in that. but you can expect us to drag our feet a little bit on that, because that’s what you do with statement language. it’s, it’s great to see the progress. but, again, i would not declare victory yet. i would say it is so great to see the reopening of the economy, though, and to see people out living their lives again. you know, who doesn’t want to see that? and it appears to be safe, and i just would encourage people to continue to get vaccinated. howard schneider. if i could follow up on that, if you—if you view this statement in, in toto and the—and the dots and the substance as well, do you think this is more a mark-to-market exercise around the improvement in health or around the inflation risks you see developing out there? chair powell. i think it’s both. you know, i think, clearly, since march what’s happened is, people have grown more confident in these very strong outcomes, that they’ll be  achieved. very strong outcomes in the economy will be achieved. there’s, there’s more grounds for comfort. we’ve seen growth coming higher than we expected. we’ve seen very strong labor demand. we’ve also seen—we have seen inflation above target, though, and i think even though, you know, in, in our forecasters’ case, they do see inflation coming back down over ’22 and ’23 into, into areas that are very consistent with our—with our mandate. nonetheless, the risk is, is something that can factor into people’s thinking about appropriate monetary policy. the thing is, you know, these are 18 different forecasts, and i can’t stand here and say exactly what was in all 18 people’s minds. but that, that is something that i think can factor into things as well—factor into our forecast as well. howard schneider. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to victoria guida with politico. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. i, i wanted to ask a little bit more about inflation to make sure i understand how you’re thinking about this. so in the projections, inflation is expected to, to be high this year and then come back down next year and then maybe start to rise a little bit again, enough for a liftoff in 2023. you know, i know that’s obviously—you know, take that with a grain of salt. but that would suggest that you all could theoretically see inflation sustainably staying above 2 percent. and so, i guess my question is, what would be causing that inflation? what, what would be—because it seems like you all now see a situation in which inflation would be rising in a way that isn’t caused by transitory factors in the—in the next couple of years. so would that be the result of a tight labor market? would that be because this whole situation has raised people’s inflation expectations? how are you thinking about that? chair powell. so what we’re seeing in the near term—again, our base case is that what we’re seeing in the near term is, is principally associated with, with the reopening of the  economy and not with a tight labor market or tight resource constraints, really. so—but you’re right. when, when you get to—in, in the forecast, all of that, you know, supply and demand sides of the economy adapt. we have a very highly adaptive, you know, flexible economy, more so than most. and by 2023, those increases are really about, about, you know, rising resource utilization or, to put it a different way, you know, low unemployment, or high employment is a way to think about it. so that’s what that’s about. that’s about the kind of broad inflationary pressure that results from, you know, a really strong expansion tightening up resource utilization across the whole economy and lifting, lifting up inflation. and that’s why—that’s why you would see it then, because by then, you know, in the forecast—and it’s just a forecast, they’re just individual forecasts. in people’s forecasts, that’s what’s happening. victoria guida. so the, the, the change in the projections reflect the fact that you all are more optimistic about the economic outlook, and not necessarily that you think that this will change the way people think about inflation? chair powell. yeah, i think—there may be an element of the latter as well, because inflation expectations have continued to move up. you know, it’s all in people’s individual thinking, and you can’t—it’s hard to say. it’s not something the committee debates in terms of, you know, what, what the outlook is for 2023. so i’m, i’m a little bit speculating, which i shouldn’t do. but it wouldn’t surprise me if there’s an element for some people in, you know, seeing the inflation performance that we’ve had and thinking that i have more confidence that we could see inflation above 2 percent, that it may not be as hard to do that as we thought, and that inflation expectations may move up to a—to a level—they were—they were really at a level that was kind of a little below 2 percent. they might move up as a consequence of this or, or, or as a consequence of, of, of the new framework. you know, we did see inflation expectations moving  up in the—in the wake of the announcement of the framework. but, you know, we don’t really know that. so, ultimately, i think it’s consistent with both those things. michelle smith. thank you. now we’ll go to greg robb at marketwatch. greg robb. hi. hi, thank you for taking my question. chair powell, i’m just looking at the forecast, and one thing i just don’t think has been talked about all that much is how much you guys—the fed thinks that the economy is going to slow next year. i mean, are we looking at a scenario of a slowing economy next year with higher inflation? and, and what do you think about that? chair powell. we’re looking at an economy that will not have the degree of, of fiscal support. the fiscal support in the forecast is much less than it was this year. so—but you’ve, you’ve still got a very strong growth, well above the longer-run potential output of the— of the economy. you’ve got—you’ve got growth meaningfully above that, and inflation is lower next year in all of our—in all of our forecasts. i think the range of, of core pce forecast for next year is 1.7 to 2.5 in 2022 and, and 2 to 2.3 in 2023. so you’re right, you’re seeing—i, i can’t remember the number, but it might be in the 3s—3, 3½ percent growth for next year. that’s, that’s a really good year—coming on the back of a 7 percent growth year, that’s a really good year. that’s, that’s a year with a lot of momentum. that’ll see—you know, that’ll cause significant job creation and, and it will—i mean, we would take 3½ percent. we didn’t have a 3½ percent growth year—we didn’t have a 3 percent growth year between the global financial crisis and the end of the expansion. so that would be a good year. gregg robb. doesn’t it seem like there’s a risk of, of, you know, like stagflation— where that—you’re going to go from 7 percent and down, that means the economy’s really, you know, dropping in some way. we haven’t seen that, right?  chair powell. well, the economy’s not, not decel—the economy is still growing, and growing at a, at a very healthy rate. our estimate—i mean, different people have different estimates—but, broadly speaking, economists think the economy has the potential to grow at around 2 percent per year. if you’re growing above that, then the unemployment rate should be declining, people should be being pulled into the labor force, wages should be going up, lots of things should be happening, businesses should be investing. so, you know, i guess to answer your question a different way, is there a risk that inflation will be higher than we think? yes. as i said earlier, you know, we, we don’t have any certainty about the timing or the extent of these effects from reopening. and therefore we don’t—we don’t think that—we think it’s unlikely that they would materially affect the underlying inflation dynamics that the economy has had for a quarter of a century. the underlying forces around the globe that have created those dynamics are intact, and those are aging population, low productivity, globalization, all of those things that, that we think have, have, you know, really held down inflation. all that’s out there still. you know, when we get through this, we may well—we’ll be facing those same forces. nonetheless, is there a risk that inflation will remain higher than we—than we thought? yes. and if, if we see inflation moving above our goals in, in a time—sorry, to an extent, to a level or, or persistently—or persistently enough, you know, we would be prepared to use our tools to address that. michelle smith. thank you. going to brian cheung with yahoo. brian cheung. chair powell, brian cheung, yahoo finance. on that point, you talked about maybe some of the more structural changes in that last answer with regards to productivity. i noted that the median projection for r*, the longer-term interest rate, is still the same at 2.5 percent. but there’s been some literature out there that maybe the covid crisis  could have actually changed some of the underlying fundamentals of the economy and maybe changed productivity, in addition to combined with demographic changes that have already been in effect to suggest that that longer-term neutral rate or r* might be higher. what would the implications of that be for monetary policy? do you think that maybe the fed could have the possibility of underestimating the long-run neutral rate? and what might be the impact of that? chair powell. a higher neutral rate would mean that interest rates would run higher by that amount. and, and that would be a good thing from the standpoint of the economy, because it would give the fed more room to cut rates. the problem with, with interest rates being close to the lower bound, of course, is that it really cuts into our ability to react to a downturn—for example, a pandemic. and if you look, for example, at the european central bank, their, their policy rate was well below zero when, when the pandemic hit. so we don’t want to be in a place where we can’t react. a higher neutral rate would, would be—from that narrow standpoint, would be a good thing for us. it would give us more room and, therefore, then, that would tend to result in better outcomes for the economy over time. you know, we, it’s—you can’t estimate it with great—with great precision. i think we would be alert to—i mean, studying r* is a—is a whole industry unto itself. and i, i think we would be alert to factors that might raise r*, the neutral rate of interest. and, you know, we, we try to keep up with that. and i think we’re, we’re, we’re all thinking about that and the possibility of that. you know, there are many—there are a lot of stories right now that could—that essentially could lead to higher productivity growth and higher r*. we don’t know which of those stories will come true. but, i mean, i’ll give you an example. it’s just there are—there are a lot of start-ups, a lot of early-stage companies. and is that going to have that effect? we don’t know. but we’ll be watching those things carefully.  michelle smith. great, thank you. for the last question, we’ll go to michael mckee at bloomberg tv. michael mckee. mr. chairman, of course you’ll be shocked to learn that you have some critics on wall street. and i would like to paraphrase a couple of their criticisms and get your reaction to them. one is that the new policy framework is that you react to actual data and do not react to forecasts, yet the actual inflation data is coming in hot and you’re relying on the forecast that it will cool down in order to make policy. i wanted to get your view on how you square that. another is that you have a long runway, you’ve said, for tapering with announcements. but if the data keep coming in faster than expected, are you trapped by fear of a taper tantrum from advancing the time period in which you announce a taper? and, finally, you’ve said the fed knows how to combat inflation, but raising rates also slows the economy. and there’s a concern that you might be sacrificing the economy if you wait too long and have to raise rates too quickly. chair powell. so that’s a—that’s a few questions there. so let me say, first, i think people misinterpret the framework. i think the—there’s nothing wrong with the framework, and there’s nothing in the framework that would in any way, you know, interfere with our ability to pursue our, our goals. that’s for starters. all of our discussions and all of our thinking and planning are taking place in the context of our new framework. we’re strongly committed to it, we think it’s well suited to our goals, including in this—in this unique time. and i think if you look at the—look at the forecasts that we’ve written down, you know, our committee is solidly behind them. the forecasts are all consistent with that. you know, your specific question, i guess, was, will we be behind the curve? and, you know, that’s, that’s not the situation we’re facing at all. the situation that we, we addressed in  our—in our statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy was a situation in which employment was at very high levels, but inflation was low. and what we said was, we wouldn’t raise interest rates just because unemployment was low and employment was high if there was no evidence of inflation or other troubling imbalances. so that’s what we said. that is not at all the current situation. in the current situation, we have many millions of people who are unemployed, and we have inflation running well above our target. the question we face with this inflation has nothing to do with our framework. it’s a very different, very difficult version of a standard investment—sorry, a central banking question. and that is, how do you separate in inflation—how do you separate things that, that follow from broad upward price pressures from things that really are a function of, of sort of idiosyncratic factors in a particular—due to particular things? i mean, a classic example was, to pick a narrow example, was the cellphone price war back in 2017. if you remember, there was—prices were incredibly low, and it held down core pce by three-tenths or something for a year, and then it fell out. so this is much bigger than that. and, of course, it’s not—it’s not easy to tell in real time which is which, but that’s, that’s the question you would face under, really, any framework. and, you know, we’re trying to sort that out. i’ve tried to, to explain that today about how we think about that. and, you know, we do think that these are temporary factors, and that they’ll wane. we can’t be absolutely certain about the timing of that, and we’re prepared to use our tools as appropriate. your second one was? oh, you know, we will—we will taper when we feel that the economy has achieved substantial further progress. and we will communicate very carefully in advance on that. and that’s what we’re doing. that’s what we’re going to do, and, and we will follow through on that. there’s no—i mean, we will do what we can to avoid a market reaction.  but, ultimately, when we achieve our macroeconomic goal, we will—we will taper as appropriate. the third thing was—what was the third thing? michael mckee. if you raise rates to control inflation, you also slow the economy. and the history of the fed is that sometimes you go too far. chair powell. that’s right. and we—look, we have to balance the two—the two goals: maximum employment and price stability. often they are—they do pull in the same direction, of course. but when we—when we raise interest rates to control inflation, there’s no question that has an effect on activity. and that’s the channel—one of the channels through which we get to inflation. we don’t think that we’re in a situation like that right now. we think that the economy is recovering from a deep hole—an unusual hole, actually, because it’s to do with, with shutting down the economy. it turns out it’s a heck of a lot easier to create demand than it is to, you know, to bring supply back up to snuff. that’s happening all over the world. there’s no reason to think that that process will last indefinitely. but we’re going, you know, we’re going to watch carefully to make sure that, that evolving inflation and our understanding of what’s happening is, is, is right. and in the meantime, we’ll conduct policy appropriately. michelle smith. thank you, mr. chair.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. page 2 federal open market committee  christopher j. gust, associate director, division of monetary affairs, board of governors stephanie e. curcuru2 and andrea raffo, deputy associate directors, division of international finance, board of governors; laura lipscomb,2 deputy associate director, division of monetary affairs, board of governors; steve spurry,2 deputy associate director, division of supervision and regulation, board of governors; jeffrey d. walker,2 deputy associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board of governors jennifer gallagher, special assistant to the board, division of board members, board of governors brian j. bonis, etienne gagnon, and dan li, assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board of governors charles fleischman, adviser, division of research and statistics, board of governors penelope a. beattie, 3 section chief, office of the secretary, board of governors alyssa arute,2 manager, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board of governors sriya anbil,2 group manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors mark a. carlson,2 senior economic project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors david h. small, project manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors david m. byrne, principal economist, division of research and statistics, board of governors; michele cavallo, bernd schlusche, mary tian, and francisco vazquez-grande, principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board of governors; alberto queralto, principal economist, division of international finance, board of governors attended through the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. 3 randall a. williams, lead information manager, division of monetary affairs, board of governors courtney demartini,2 lead financial institution policy analyst, division of monetary affairs, board of governors anthony m. diercks, senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board of governors joseph w. gruber and ellis w. tallman, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of kansas city and cleveland, respectively anne baum, carlos garriga, susan mclaughlin,2 anna nordstrom,2 giovanni olivei, paolo a. pesenti, julie ann remache,2 robert g. valletta, and mark l.j. wright, senior vice presidents, federal reserve banks of new york, st. louis, new york, new york, boston, new york, new york, san francisco, and minneapolis, respectively roc armenter, jennifer s. crystal,2 jonas fisher, and matthew nemeth,2 vice presidents, federal reserve banks of philadelphia, new york, chicago, and new york, respectively jason a. miu,2 assistant vice president, federal reserve bank of new york karel mertens, senior economic policy advisor, federal reserve bank of dallas kristopher gerardi, financial economist and senior advisor, federal reserve bank of atlanta haitham jendoubi,2 policy and markets analysis manager, federal reserve bank of new york discussion of repurchase agreement arrangements participants resumed their discussion from the april 2021 fomc meeting of considerations related to the establishment of a domestic standing repurchase agreement (repo) facility (srf) and a standing foreign international monetary authorities (fima) repo facility. building on discussion at previous meetings, the staff presented considerations for how these facilities might be designed. the design considerations were guided by minutes of the meeting of june 15–16, 2021 page 3  participants’ general desire to have these facilities play a backstop role in fostering effective implementation of monetary policy and supporting smooth functioning of markets. in april, participants highlighted the importance of designing these facilities in a way that would leave ample room for private market activity while minimizing the potential for stigma, promote equitable access to an appropriately broad set of counterparties, and be governed by the fomc. with these principles and goals in mind, the staff presented potential terms for each facility. the staff presentation on the potential design of a domestic srf included establishing the minimum bid rate at 25 basis points—the top of the target range for the federal funds rate. the staff briefing suggested counterparties for the facility would include primary dealers and would be extended over time to include banks that expressed interest in participation. the staff presentation noted that such a facility could be limited to only u.s. treasury securities or could accept all securities currently accepted in open market operations (omos), which include treasury securities, agency securities, and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs). the briefing noted that, on the one hand, restricting eligible collateral for a domestic srf to u.s. treasury securities could mitigate concerns that an srf could encourage counterparties to take on greater liquidity risk. on the other hand, accepting agency securities and agency mbs in an srf would be consistent with the structure of current repo operations and could help address a greater range of potential repo market pressures from spilling over into the federal funds market. the proposed design for a standing fima repo facility was similar in structure to the existing temporary fima repo facility. under the draft terms, the range of eligible counterparties for the fima repo facility would continue to include foreign official institutions, largely comprising central banks, subject to individual approval. the eligible collateral would continue to be limited to u.s. treasury securities. the draft terms envisioned that the rate for the fima repo facility would be set equal to the top of the target range for the federal funds rate, a rate equal to the minimum bid rate in the draft terms for the domestic srf. in their discussion of considerations related to the design of a domestic srf, a substantial majority restated their view, conveyed at the april 2021 meeting, that the potential benefits of such a facility outweighed the potential costs. participants broadly supported the terms presented by the staff for such a facility. several participants noted the importance of setting the minimum bid rate high enough so that the facility was positioned as a backstop, while some pointed out the importance of not setting the rate so high that usage of the facility could be stigmatized or that the facility would not sufficiently contain pressures that could spill over into the federal funds market. several participants noted that setting an srf rate at the top of the target range for the federal funds rate would be consistent with addressing pressures that could spill over to the federal funds market. others remarked that setting the srf rate at the same level as the primary credit rate for borrowing at the discount window would promote equitable access to federal reserve liquidity across banks and counterparties for omos. several participants commented that it may also be appropriate to adjust the srf rate over time based on accumulated experience and economic or financial developments. several participants suggested that, in order to ensure an srf continues to be effective, it may be appropriate to study the costs and benefits of additional adjustments over time, such as moving to a cleared settlement structure. most participants noted the benefits of allowing banks to be counterparties to a domestic srf, including more directly addressing liquidity pressures for participants in the federal funds market and promoting equitable access to liquidity across domestic counterparties. many participants judged that it would be appropriate to accept the same set of securities that is currently accepted for omos. some participants indicated that accepting these securities in the domestic srf’s operations should increase the effectiveness of the facility in limiting upward pressures in repo markets that could spill over into the federal funds market. some other participants noted that limiting acceptable securities for srf operations to u.s. treasury securities could have benefits, including consistency with the regulatory distinction between u.s. treasury securities and other types of securities, potentially limiting the federal reserve’s footprint in financial markets, and maintaining consistency with the structure of the proposed fima repo facility and the overnight reverse repo (on rrp) facility. several participants cautioned that establishing a backstop srf would not diminish the importance of providing a sufficiently ample supply of reserves on an ongoing basis or the need to improve the structural resiliency of the u.s. treasury market. a couple of participants reiterated their concerns about converting current ongoing daily repo operations to a standing facility and suggested ways to calibrate the terms of the facility to mitigate these concerns, including setting a relatively page 4 federal open market committee  high minimum bid rate or limiting securities eligible for srf operations to only u.s. treasury securities. in their discussion of considerations related to the design of a standing fima repo facility, a substantial majority supported the broad structure discussed in the staff presentation. many participants generally saw benefits in keeping the rate at the same level as that in the potential domestic srf in light of the similar nature of the transactions and high quality of the collateral. a number of participants remarked that the rate at the fima repo facility could be set at a higher level than at the domestic srf or could be set at a level comparable to that in the federal reserve’s dollar liquidity swap lines. a couple of participants commented on the potential reputational risks of establishing a standing fima repo facility, including those associated with providing liquidity on a standing basis to a wider set of central banks and finance ministries than through existing swap lines. these participants reiterated the importance of maintaining well-defined criteria for participation in the facility and suggested that the fomc should receive regular reports on the operations and counterparties approved for a standing fima repo facility. participants agreed that they would continue their discussion of design parameters for both a domestic srf and a standing fima repo facility. the chair asked the staff to work on a specific proposal that reflected the views expressed by participants at this meeting. developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments over the intermeeting period. on net, u.s. financial conditions eased further, led by a decline in treasury yields. lower term premiums appeared to be a significant component of the declines, as reflected by lower implied volatility on longer-term interest rates. equities rose slightly, the broad dollar weakened, and credit spreads were little changed at historically tight levels. over the period, market participants focused on data showing lower employment growth and higher inflation readings than had been expected. the median 2021 core personal consumption expenditures (pce) inflation forecast from the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers jumped nearly 1 percentage point from the previous survey. however, median forecasts for 2022 and 2023 each rose less than 0.1 percent, suggesting expectations for inflationary pressures to subside. inflation compensation as measured by five-year breakeven rates on treasury inflation-protected securities peaked in mid-may at the highest level in more than a decade, but the increase was driven almost entirely by higher inflation compensation at short horizons. indeed, oneyear-forward inflation compensation at horizons beyond a year was relatively stable. measures of expectations for federal reserve policy were little changed over the period. the median respondent to the desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants continued to expect the pace of federal reserve asset purchases to begin to decline in the first quarter of 2022, although most respondents also saw a reasonable chance that this decline could occur one quarter earlier or later. the median respondent expected purchases to end in the fourth quarter of 2022. the desk’s survey measures of the expected path of the target federal funds rate were also fairly steady, and the median respondent continued to expect the first target rate increase to occur in the third quarter of 2023. nearly all desk survey respondents anticipated that the summary of economic projections would show the median committee participant projecting either no increase in the target range or one ¼ percentage point increase by the end of 2023. the manager noted that downward pressure on money market rates continued over the period. banks continued to limit growth in their balance sheets by allowing wholesale liabilities to mature and encouraging customers to shift some nonoperational deposits to money market funds. moreover, the supply of treasury bills, a primary investment for government money market mutual funds, fell further. against this backdrop, the secured overnight financing rate (sofr) printed at 1 basis point each day in the intermeeting period, while the effective federal funds rate (effr) decreased 1 basis point, to 6 basis points. amid heightened demand and reduced supply for shortterm investments, the on rrp continued to maintain a floor on overnight rates. growth in the on rrp and other nonreserve liabilities helped expand the base of federal reserve liabilities supporting asset purchases, damping the increase in reserves and easing pressure on bank balance sheets. over the next intermeeting period, the manager anticipated that further increases in reserves and reductions in bill supply could put additional downward pressure on overnight rates. a modest technical adjustment to administered rates could be warranted to maintain the effr well within the target range and support smooth functioning of short-term funding markets. such an adjustment would be expected to raise the federal funds minutes of the meeting of june 15–16, 2021 page 5  rate and to lift other overnight rates modestly. most respondents to the desk’s surveys expected an administered rate adjustment this summer. the manager noted that balances at the on rrp facility would likely continue to grow over coming months. the staff would continue to monitor developments, and the manager noted that, at some point, it could become appropriate to consider raising the counterparty limits for the on rrp. the manager provided an update on progress toward winding down a number of emergency facilities established under section 13(3) of the federal reserve act. while market participants took note of the federal reserve board’s announcement on winding down the secondary market corporate credit facility (smccf) holdings, it elicited little price response. the commencement of exchange-traded funds sales proceeded smoothly. all of the smccf assets are expected to be sold by the end of this year. finally, the manager noted a proposal to request the chair’s approval for an extension to the temporary u.s. dollar liquidity swap arrangements to december 31, 2021. the extension would benefit the u.s. economy by helping forestall potential pressures in offshore dollar funding markets that could spill over to u.s. financial conditions while much of the global economy remains on an uncertain recovery path from the pandemic. should the committee decide to make the fima repo facility standing, an extension would also provide sufficient time for those temporary swap line central banks that are not currently enrolled in the fima repo facility to do so and to become fully operational. secretary’s note: the chair subsequently provided approval to the desk, following the procedures in the authorization for foreign currency operations, to extend the expiration of the temporary u.s. dollar liquidity swap lines through december 31, 2021. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the june 15–16 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) was expanding in the second quarter at a pace that was faster than in the first quarter of the year. moreover, labor market conditions had improved further in april and may. consumer price inflation through april—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the pce price index—had picked up notably, largely reflecting transitory factors. total nonfarm payroll employment increased solidly over april and may, though at a slower monthly pace than over february and march. as of may, total payroll employment had retraced two-thirds of the job losses seen at the onset of the pandemic, although employment in the leisure and hospitality sector and in the education sector (including both public and private education) had bounced back by less. over april and may, the unemployment rate edged down and stood at 5.8 percent in may. the unemployment rates for african americans, asians, and hispanics also moved down, although the rates for african americans and hispanics remained well above the national average. both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio moved up slightly, and both measures had recovered only partially from their lows during the pandemic. initial claims for regular state unemployment insurance benefits had moved down further since mid-april and were at the lowest level since the beginning of the pandemic, though they remained high relative to their prepandemic level. weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by federal reserve board staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp, which were available through may, suggested that the pace of private employment gains had stepped up late in that month. the pace of increases in several measures of labor compensation had moved up in recent months. average hourly earnings for all employees jumped at a sizable monthly rate in april and may, even though the large job gains in the leisure and hospitality sector—where wages tend to be lower than in other sectors—likely held down the increases in average hourly earnings in these months. a staff measure of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the adp data had stepped up significantly in april relative to march. the employment cost index of total hourly compensation in the private sector increased at an annual rate of 4 percent in the three months ending in march, a notably faster pace than over the previous three months. recent 12-month change measures of inflation, using either pce prices or the consumer price index (cpi), were boosted significantly by the base effects of the drop in prices from the spring of 2020 rolling out of the calculation. in addition, a surge in demand as the economy reopened further, combined with production bottlenecks and supply constraints, contributed to the large recent page 6 federal open market committee  monthly price increases. total pce price inflation was 3.6 percent over the 12 months ending in april. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending in april. in contrast, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 1.8 percent in april. in may, the 12-month change in the cpi was 5 percent, while core cpi inflation was 3.8 percent over the same period. in the second quarter, the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, had returned to the level that prevailed in 2014, a time when inflation was modest. real pce increased substantially in march and then was little changed from that high level in april. the components of the nominal retail sales data that are used to estimate pce edged down in may, but the sales data for the previous two months were revised up markedly, pointing to stronger real pce growth than had been initially estimated. combined with reduced social distancing and more widespread vaccinations, key factors that influence consumer spending—including increasing job gains, the upward trend in real disposable income, high levels of household net worth, and low interest rates— pointed to strong real pce growth over the rest of the year. housing demand continued to be robust, with construction of single-family homes and home sales remaining well above their pre-pandemic levels and house prices rising appreciably further. the incoming data for this sector indicated that residential investment spending was being temporarily held back in the second quarter by materials shortages and limited stocks of homes for sale. available indicators suggested that equipment and intangibles investment—particularly in high-tech categories—was increasing solidly in the second quarter. rising orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft were running well above the increases in shipments of those goods through april, which pointed to additional gains in business equipment spending in coming months. moreover, business investment in the drilling and mining sector appeared to be increasing further, as crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of drilling investment—continued to rise through early june, with oil prices moving higher. however, nominal nonresidential construction spending declined further in april, and investment in nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and mining sector looked to remain weak in the current quarter, likely reflecting continued hesitation by businesses to commit to building projects with lengthy times to completion and uncertain future returns. manufacturing output expanded solidly, on balance, over april and may. output in the motor vehicle and parts sector rose, on net, although semiconductor shortages were still weighing on vehicle production. factory output outside of the motor vehicle sector increased solidly, and production in the mining sector, which includes crude oil and natural gas extraction, also increased over april and may. total real government purchases looked to be about flat, on balance, in the second quarter. data through may indicated that real federal defense spending was rising only slightly, and nondefense spending was expected to drop following a first-quarter surge in pandemic-related expenditures. state and local government purchases looked to be increasing significantly, as the payrolls of these governments expanded solidly over april and may. nominal state and local construction spending, however, edged down in april. with the strong economic recovery leading to an improved outlook for state and local tax revenues, and the additional federal support for these governments included in the american rescue plan, state and local purchases appeared likely to increase notably over the rest of the year. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit widened to a record size in march and then reversed that widening in april. real goods exports in march surpassed their january 2020 levels for the first time and then continued to grow in april, with particular strength in exports of capital goods. real goods imports surged to record-high levels in march and then stepped back modestly in april. bottlenecks in the global semiconductor industry, which had weighed on exports and imports of automotive products this year, continued to do so through april. exports and imports of services remained depressed relative to pre-pandemic levels, as international travel increased only slightly from february. recent data pointed to a pickup in foreign economic activity in the second quarter. demand improved as social-distancing restrictions were lifted in the united kingdom and the euro area following the rollout of vaccines. with the economic reopening under way, purchasing managers indexes (pmis) in both the manufacturing and services sectors were strong in europe in april and may. in the emerging market economies (emes), manufacturing pmis and exports were gener- minutes of the meeting of june 15–16, 2021 page 7  ally robust. however, many emes continued to struggle to contain the virus amid a slow pace of vaccinations, particularly in south america and parts of asia. consumer price inflation continued to rise in many foreign economies, primarily driven by rebounding energy prices and the fading effects of steep price declines seen early last year. price increases were concentrated in relatively few items, suggesting that underlying inflationary pressures remained subdued amid considerable economic slack. staff review of the financial situation overall financial conditions eased during the intermeeting period as market participants appeared to remain confident that the economic recovery was broadly on track, that inflation over the medium term would stay contained, and that monetary policy would remain accommodative. domestic equity prices edged up, and corporate bond spreads narrowed a little. yields on nominal treasury securities declined modestly since the previous fomc meeting. measures of inflation compensation at shorter horizons moved down somewhat, on net, while measures of longer-term inflation compensation were little changed. a straight read of overnight index swap (ois) quotes suggested that the expected path for the federal funds rate moved lower over the intermeeting period and that the expected policy rate would remain below 25 basis points until the first quarter of 2023. short-term funding markets functioned smoothly amid record participation in the on rrp facility. financing conditions for businesses and households remained accommodative, particularly for large firms and households with high credit ratings. the treasury yield curve flattened a bit, on net, with 2-year yields about unchanged while 5-, 10-, and 30-year yields declined somewhat. inflation compensation declined a bit at shorter horizons but held steady at longer horizons. market expectations for the federal funds rate path over the medium term, as implied by ois quotes unadjusted for term premiums, declined moderately. broad stock price indexes increased slightly over the intermeeting period, with stocks in cyclically sensitive sectors generally outperforming. one-month optionimplied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—reached its lowest level since february 2020 and remained a bit below the middle of its historical distribution. spreads of yields on corporate bonds over those on comparablematurity treasury securities narrowed a little for all credit ratings. meanwhile, yields on municipal bonds reached historical lows, with spreads roughly unchanged for high-credit-rated bonds and moderately narrower for lower-credit-rated bonds. short-term funding markets continued to function smoothly over the intermeeting period. short-term and overnight rates remained near historical lows, with overnight rates dipping slightly. the effr was nearly constant throughout the period at 6 basis points, while the sofr remained at 1 basis point. with rates low and net treasury bill supply contracting, government money market funds, which at the same time were attracting notable inflows, had limited investment options at nonnegative rates. as a result, on rrp take-up by these funds surged, pushing total on rrp participation to record levels in late may and june. international financial market participants were focused on news about inflation and monetary policy communications. in europe, stronger-than-expected readings for both inflation and economic activity, as well as increased optimism about vaccinations, contributed to a rise in market-based measures of inflation expectations. on net, european longer-term government bond yields were little changed even as u.s. yields declined, and the broad dollar index decreased modestly. in emerging markets, credit spreads narrowed a bit, and capital flows into eme funds continued at a moderate pace. equity indexes increased somewhat in both emerging and advanced foreign economies. financing conditions for nonfinancial firms through capital markets remained highly accommodative, as reflected in historically low corporate bond and leveraged loan yields as well as high price-to-earnings ratios in the equity markets. gross issuance of corporate bonds and leveraged loans was solid. equity raised through traditional initial public offerings was robust in april but softened to more moderate levels in may and through midjune, while the pace of seasoned equity offerings was modest over the intermeeting period. meanwhile, equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies slowed markedly. commercial and industrial (c&i) loans outstanding at banks fell through mid-may, with forgiveness of paycheck protection program (ppp) loans continuing to drive balances down and more than offsetting volumes of new loan originations. tepid demand for loans appears to have been a factor in the decline in loans outstanding. for instance, despite healthy growth in c&i commitments at large banks over the first quarter, there was no corresponding change in the utilization rates of credit lines. the credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations remained largely stable over the intermeeting period. the page 8 federal open market committee  volume of credit rating upgrades for nonfinancial bonds and leveraged loans outpaced downgrades somewhat in the april-to-early-june period. there were no reported corporate defaults in april, and defaults were low in may. delinquency rates on bank c&i loans also remained low in the first quarter. market indicators of future default expectations were little changed and remained low relative to their historical range. pace in april, driven by rapid growth in auto loan balances. credit card balances on banks’ books rose in may, reversing an april decline. for subprime borrowers, conditions in the credit card market appeared to have eased somewhat further from the tight conditions seen after the onset of the pandemic. conditions in the asset-backed securities market continued to be supportive of lending during the intermeeting period. in the municipal bond market, financing conditions remained accommodative over the intermeeting period. issuance of municipal bonds was solid in recent months, and indicators of the credit quality of municipal debt showed some signs of improvement, with the volume of bond upgrades outpacing the volume of bond downgrades. staff economic outlook the u.s. economic projection prepared by the staff for the june fomc meeting was stronger than the april forecast. real gdp growth was projected to increase substantially this year, with a correspondingly rapid decline in the unemployment rate. further reductions in social distancing and favorable financial conditions were expected to support output growth, even though the effects of fiscal stimulus on economic growth were starting to unwind. with the boost to growth from continued reductions in social distancing assumed to fade after 2021 and the further unwinding of fiscal stimulus, gdp growth was expected to step down in 2022 and 2023. nevertheless, with monetary policy assumed to remain highly accommodative, the staff continued to anticipate that real gdp growth would outpace that of potential over most of this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels. financing conditions for small businesses were little changed, with supply of small business loans remaining tight and demand still subdued outside of the ppp. while small business loan originations rose in april, surpassing pre-pandemic levels, loans made under the ppp likely accounted for a significant portion of that growth. loan performance and other indicators of the financial health of small businesses improved in recent months. however, in certain sectors, such as accommodation and food services, small businesses remained stressed. for commercial real estate (cre) financed through capital markets, financing conditions remained mostly accommodative over the intermeeting period. issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) was solid in recent months except in the retail and hotel sectors. spreads of agency cmbs narrowed to below prepandemic levels. meanwhile, spreads on non-agency triple-a cmbs were little changed at accommodative levels, while non-agency triple-b spreads remained elevated. cre loan growth at banks continued to be weak through mid-may, likely reflecting weak demand as well as tight underwriting standards. in the residential mortgage market, financing conditions were little changed over the intermeeting period and remained accommodative for stronger borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. credit continued to appear tight for borrowers with lower credit scores. mortgage rates for most borrowers were little changed, on net, and remained near historical lows. home-purchase and refinance mortgage activity continued at a strong pace through early june. the share of mortgages in forbearance declined in may. financing conditions for consumer credit remained generally accommodative. consumer loans grew at a robust the staff’s near-term outlook for inflation was revised up markedly, but the staff continued to expect the rise in inflation this year to be transitory. the 12-month change in total and core pce prices had moved well above 2 percent in april, and incoming cpi data suggested that pce price inflation would remain high in may. the recent 12-month measures of inflation were being boosted significantly by the base effects of the drop in prices from the spring of 2020 rolling out of the calculation. in addition, the surge in demand as the economy reopened further, combined with production bottlenecks and supply constraints, contributed to the large recent monthly price increases. the staff expected the 12-month change in pce prices to gradually move down in coming months, reflecting, importantly, the fading of base effects along with smaller expected monthly price increases, but pce price inflation was forecast to still be well above 2 percent at the end of this year. over the next year, the transitory price increases caused by bottlenecks and supply constraints were expected to largely reverse, and the growth in demand was forecast to ease. as a result, inflation was projected to slow to slightly below 2 percent in 2022 before moving back up to a bit above 2 percent in 2023, supported by high levels of resource utilization. minutes of the meeting of june 15–16, 2021 page 9  the staff continued to see the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook as elevated, although increasingly widespread vaccinations, along with ongoing policy support, were viewed as helping to diminish some of these uncertainties. nevertheless, the staff judged that the risks around their strong baseline projection for economic activity were still tilted somewhat to the downside, as adverse alternative courses of the pandemic— including the possibility of the spread of more-contagious, more-vaccine-resistant covid-19 variants— seemed more likely than outcomes that would be more favorable than in the baseline forecast. the staff continued to view the risks around the inflation projection as roughly balanced. on the upside, bottlenecks, supply disruptions, and historically high rates of resource utilization were seen as potential sources of greater-thanexpected inflationary pressures, particularly if there were a significant rise in inflation expectations that altered inflation dynamics. on the downside, if the effects of supply constraints proved to be transitory, as expected, then the inflation record from the past 25 years suggested the possibility that low underlying trend inflation and a flat phillips curve could cause inflation to revert to relatively low levels despite a strengthening economy. participants’ views on current economic conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2021 through 2023 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. in their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that progress on vaccinations had reduced the spread of covid-19 in the united states. amid this progress and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had strengthened. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remained weak but had shown improvement. inflation had risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants generally noted that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. participants observed that economic activity was expanding at a historically rapid pace, led by robust gains in consumer spending. a vast majority of participants revised up their projections for real gdp growth this year compared with the projections they had submitted in march, citing stronger consumer demand and improvements in vaccination rates as the primary reasons for these upgrades. that said, participants generally saw supply disruptions and labor shortages as constraining the expansion of economic activity this year. participants’ projections of real gdp growth in 2022 and 2023 were generally little changed. in their discussion of the household sector, participants remarked that indicators of consumer spending had continued to surge and expected that further gains in spending would contribute significantly to the economic recovery. many participants commented that accommodative financial conditions, the release of pent-up demand, progress on widespread vaccination, the ongoing reduction of social-distancing measures, and fiscal stimulus were important factors supporting spending. some participants also noted that consumer spending would likely continue to be bolstered by the ongoing effects from these factors as well as by households’ elevated level of accumulated savings and generally healthy balance sheets. a majority of participants observed that housing market activity remained strong. with respect to the business sector, most participants noted that activity in the service industries most adversely affected by the pandemic, such as in the leisure and hospitality sector, was rebounding as the economy reopened. a number of participants noted that business equipment investment was rising at a strong pace, but growth in manufacturing activity was being restrained by production bottlenecks and supply constraints. in addition, participants reported hearing from contacts in a broad range of industries that shortages of materials and labor as well as supply chain challenges were limiting the ability of firms to keep up with demand. some business contacts indicated that they were responding to input shortages and bottlenecks by canceling shifts, raising compensation to attract and retain workers, raising prices, or focusing on cutting costs and increasing productivity, particularly through automation. page 10 federal open market committee  participants commented on the continued improvement in labor market conditions in recent months. job gains in april and may averaged more than 400,000, and the unemployment rate edged down, on net, to 5.8 percent over the period. many participants pointed to the elevated number of job openings and high rates of job switching as further evidence of the improvement in labor market conditions. many participants remarked, however, that the economy was still far from achieving the committee’s broad-based and inclusive maximumemployment goal, and some participants indicated that recent job gains, while strong, were weaker than they had expected. a number of participants noted that the labor market recovery continued to be uneven across demographic and income groups and across sectors. participants noted that their district contacts had reported having trouble hiring workers to meet demand, likely reflecting factors such as early retirements, concerns about the virus, childcare responsibilities, and expanded unemployment insurance benefits. some participants remarked that these factors were making people either less able or less inclined to work in the current environment. citing recent wage data and reports from business contacts, many participants judged that labor shortages were putting upward pressure on wages or leading employers to provide additional financial incentives to attract and retain workers, particularly in lowerwage occupations. participants expected labor market conditions to continue to improve, with labor shortages expected to ease throughout the summer and into the fall as progress on vaccinations continues, social distancing unwinds further, more schools reopen, and expanded unemployment insurance benefits expire. in their discussions on inflation, participants stated that they had expected inflation to move above 2 percent in the near term, in part as the drop in prices from early in the pandemic fell out of the calculation and past increases in oil prices passed through to consumer energy prices. however, participants remarked that the actual rise in inflation was larger than anticipated, with the 12-month change in the pce price index reaching 3.6 percent in april. participants attributed the upside surprise to more widespread supply constraints in product and labor markets than they had anticipated and to a larger-than-expected surge in consumer demand as the economy reopened. they noted that many of their district contacts had reported that higher input costs were putting upward pressure on prices. most participants observed that the largest contributors to the rise in measured inflation were sectors affected by supply bottlenecks or sectors where price levels were rebounding from levels depressed by the pandemic. looking ahead, participants generally expected inflation to ease as the effect of these transitory factors dissipated, but several participants remarked that they anticipated that supply chain limitations and input shortages would put upward pressure on prices into next year. several participants noted that, during the early months of the reopening, uncertainty remained too high to accurately assess how long inflation pressures will be sustained. some participants commented that recent readings of inflation measures that exclude volatile components, such as trimmed mean measures, had been relatively stable at or just below 2 percent. in their comments on longer-term inflation expectations, a number of participants noted that, despite increases earlier this year, measures of longer-term inflation expectations had remained in ranges that were broadly consistent with the committee’s longer-run inflation goal. others noted that it was this year’s increases that had brought these measures to levels that were broadly consistent with the committee’s longer-run inflation goal. participants noted that overall financial conditions remained highly accommodative, in part reflecting the stance of monetary policy, which continued to deliver appropriate support to the economy. several participants highlighted, however, that low interest rates were contributing to elevated house prices and that valuation pressures in housing markets might pose financial stability risks. in discussing the uncertainty and risks associated with the economic outlook, participants commented that the process of reopening the economy was unprecedented and likely to be uneven across sectors. some participants judged that supply chain disruptions and labor shortages complicated the task of assessing progress toward the committee’s goals and that the speed at which these factors would dissipate was uncertain. accordingly, participants judged that uncertainty around their economic projections was elevated. although they generally saw the risks to the outlook for economic activity as broadly balanced, a substantial majority of participants judged that the risks to their inflation projections were tilted to the upside because of concerns that supply disruptions and labor shortages might linger for longer and might have larger or more persistent effects on prices and wages than they currently assumed. several participants expressed concern that longer-term inflation expectations might rise to inappropriate levels if elevated inflation readings persisted. several other participants cautioned that downside risks to inflation re- minutes of the meeting of june 15–16, 2021 page 11  mained because temporary price pressures might unwind faster than currently anticipated and because the forces that held down inflation and inflation expectations during the previous economic expansion had not gone away or might reinforce the effect of the unwinding of temporary price pressures. in their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the federal reserve’s commitment to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. participants generally agreed that the economic recovery was incomplete and that risks to the economic outlook remained. although inflation had risen more than anticipated, the increase was seen as largely reflecting temporary factors, and participants expected inflation to decline toward the committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective. participants judged that the current stance of monetary policy and policy guidance remained appropriate to promote maximum employment as well as to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent. participants also reiterated that the existing outcome-based guidance implied that the paths of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet would depend on actual progress toward reaching the committee’s maximum-employment and inflation goals. in light of the incoming data and the implications for their economic outlooks, a few participants mentioned that they expected the economic conditions set out in the committee’s forward guidance for the federal funds rate to be met somewhat earlier than they had projected in march. several participants emphasized, however, that uncertainty around the economic outlook was elevated and that it was too early to draw firm conclusions about the paths of the labor market and inflation. in their view, this heightened uncertainty regarding the evolution of the economy also implied significant uncertainty about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate. some participants noted that communications about the appropriate path of policy would be a focus of market participants in the current environment and commented that it would be important to emphasize that the committee’s reaction function or commitment to its monetary policy framework had not changed. participants discussed the federal reserve’s asset purchases and progress toward the committee’s goals since last december when the committee adopted its guidance for asset purchases. the committee’s standard of “substantial further progress” was generally seen as not having yet been met, though participants expected progress to continue. various participants mentioned that they expected the conditions for beginning to reduce the pace of asset purchases to be met somewhat earlier than they had anticipated at previous meetings in light of incoming data. some participants saw the incoming data as providing a less clear signal about the underlying economic momentum and judged that the committee would have information in coming months to make a better assessment of the path of the labor market and inflation. as a result, several of these participants emphasized that the committee should be patient in assessing progress toward its goals and in announcing changes to its plans for asset purchases. participants generally judged that, as a matter of prudent planning, it was important to be well positioned to reduce the pace of asset purchases, if appropriate, in response to unexpected economic developments, including faster-thananticipated progress toward the committee’s goals or the emergence of risks that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. various participants offered their views on the committee’s agency mbs purchases. several participants saw benefits to reducing the pace of these purchases more quickly or earlier than treasury purchases in light of valuation pressures in housing markets. several other participants, however, commented that reducing the pace of treasury and mbs purchases commensurately was preferable because this approach would be well aligned with the committee’s previous communications or because purchases of treasury securities and mbs both provide accommodation through their influence on broader financial conditions. in coming meetings, participants agreed to continue assessing the economy’s progress toward the committee’s goals and to begin to discuss their plans for adjusting the path and composition of asset purchases. in addition, participants reiterated their intention to provide notice well in advance of an announcement to reduce the pace of purchases. with regard to the implementation of monetary policy, participants had observed downward pressure on money market rates over the intermeeting period and viewed the possibility of further downward pressure on these rates in the near term as likely. consequently, they noted that an adjustment to the federal reserve’s administered rates would help keep the federal funds rate well within the target range and support smooth market functioning of short-term funding markets. participants agreed that page 12 federal open market committee  this technical adjustment had no bearing on the appropriate path for the federal funds rate or the stance of monetary policy. would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that progress on vaccinations had reduced the spread of covid-19 in the united states. they noted that amid progress and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had strengthened. although the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remained weak, they had shown improvement. inflation had risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members also agreed that the path of the economy would depend significantly on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. all members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation having run persistently below this longerrun goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. members expected to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until those outcomes were achieved. all members agreed to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, members agreed that it would be appropriate for the federal reserve to continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency mbs by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress had been made toward the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals. they judged that these asset purchases members judged that the economic outlook had continued to improve and that the most negative effects of the pandemic on the economy most likely had occurred. as a result, they agreed to remove references in the fomc statement that noted that the virus was “causing tremendous human and economic hardship” and that “the ongoing public health crisis continues to weigh on the economy.” instead, they agreed to say that progress on vaccinations had reduced the spread of covid-19 and would likely continue to reduce the negative economic effects of the public health crisis. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective june 17, 2021, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. • increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) by $40 billion per month. • increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. minutes of the meeting of june 15–16, 2021 page 13  • conduct repurchase agreement operations to support effective policy implementation and the smooth functioning of short-term u.s. dollar funding markets. • conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $80 billion per day; the percounterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. progress on vaccinations has reduced the spread of covid-19 in the united states. amid this progress and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have strengthened. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic remain weak but have shown improvement. inflation has risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy will depend significantly on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remain. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation having run persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer‑term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. the committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, the federal reserve will continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage‑backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward the committee’s maximum employment and price stability goals. these asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, thomas i. barkin, raphael w. bostic, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, mary c. daly, charles l. evans, randal k. quarles, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. page 14 federal open market committee  consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required and excess reserve balances to 0.15 percent. setting the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances 15 basis points above the bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate is intended to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates well within the federal open market committee’s target range and to support the smooth functioning of short-term funding markets. the board of governors also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective june 17, 2021. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, july 27– 28, 2021. the meeting adjourned at 10:40 a.m. on june 16, 2021. notation vote by notation vote completed on may 18, 2021, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on april 27–28, 2021.  james a. clouse secretary 
uly 28, 2021 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. today the federal open market committee kept interest rates near zero and maintained our asset purchases. these measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to support the economy until the recovery is complete. progress in vaccinations and unprecedented fiscal policy actions are also providing strong support to the recovery. indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen, and real gdp this year appears to be on track to post its fastest rate of increase in decades. much of this rapid growth reflects the continued bounceback in activity from depressed levels. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have shown improvement but have not fully recovered. household spending is rising at an especially rapid pace, boosted by the ongoing reopening of the economy and ongoing policy support. the housing sector remains very strong, and business investment is increasing at a solid pace. in some industries, near-term supply constraints are restraining activity. these constraints are particularly acute in the motor vehicle industry, where worldwide shortages of semiconductors have sharply curtailed production so far this year. as with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. demand for labor is very strong, and employment rose 850,000 in june, with the  leisure and hospitality sector continuing to post notable gains. nonetheless, the labor market has a ways to go. the unemployment rate in june—in june was 5.9 percent, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs, ongoing fears of the virus, and unemployment insurance payments, appear to be weighing on employment growth. these factors should wane in coming months, leading to strong gains in employment. the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. in particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower-wage workers in the service sector and on african americans and hispanics. inflation has increased notably and will likely remain elevated in coming months before moderating. as the economy continues to reopen and spending rebounds, we are seeing upward pressure on prices, particularly because supply bottlenecks in some sectors have limited how quickly production can respond in the near term. these bottleneck effects have been larger than anticipated, but as these transitory supply effects abate, inflation is expected to drop back toward our longer-run goal. very low readings from early in the pandemic as well as the pass-through of past increases in oil prices to consumer energy prices also contribute to the increase, although these base effects and energy effects are receding. the process of reopening the economy is unprecedented, as was the shutdown at the onset of the pandemic. as the reopening continues, bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other constraints could continue to limit how quickly supply can adjust, raising the possibility that  inflation could turn out to be higher and more persistent than we expect. our new framework for monetary policy emphasizes the importance of having well-anchored inflation expectations, both to, to foster price stability and to enhance our ability to promote our broad-based and inclusive maximum-employment goal. indicators of long-term inflation expectations appear broadly consistent with our longer- run inflation goal of 2 percent. if we saw signs that the path of inflation or longer-term inflation expectations were moving materially and persistently beyond levels consistent with our goal, we’d be prepared to adjust the stance of policy. the effects of the pandemic on the economy have continued to diminish, but risks to the economic outlook remain. progress on vaccinations has limited the spread of covid-19. however, the pace of vaccinations has slowed, and the delta strain of the virus is spreading quickly in some areas. continued progress on vaccinations would support a return to more normal economic conditions. the fed’s policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. as the committee reiterated in today’s policy statement, with inflation having run persistently below 2 percent, we will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. we expect to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these employment and inflation outcomes are achieved. with regard to interest rates, we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions  have reached level—levels consistent with the committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in addition, we are continuing to—continuing to increase our holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mbs by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our maximum-employment and price- stability goals. our asset purchases have been a critical tool. they helped preserve financial stability and market functioning early in the pandemic and since then have helped foster accommodative financial conditions to support the economy. at our meeting that concluded earlier today, the committee continued to discuss the progress made toward our—toward our goals since the committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last december. we also reviewed some considerations around how our asset purchases might be adjusted, including their pace and composition, once economic conditions warrant a change. participants expect that the economy will continue to move toward our standard of “substantial further progress.” in coming meetings, the committee will again assess the economy’s progress toward our goals, and the timing of any change in the pace of our asset purchases will depend on the incoming data. as we’ve said, we will provide advance notice before making any changes to our purchases. on a final note, we announced the establishment of two standing repo facilities, a domestic one for primary dealers and additional banks and another for foreign and international monetary authorities. these facilities will serve as backstops in money markets to support the effective implementation of monetary policy and smooth market functioning.  to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to steve liesman with cnbc. steve liesman. thank you very much. mr. chairman, i wonder if you might be able to put some, i don’t know, numbers or maybe more detail around this concept of “substantial further progress.” what counts as the progress numerically, if you will, or, or, or citing data, if you could, that you cited in the statement today? and if you could be more specific about what substantial further progress would look like and if that would then lead you to an announcement of an actual reduction in the purchases of your assets. thank you. chair powell. great. thank you. so more detail on substantial further progress. so let’s talk about the maximum-employment part of that. as you know, with maximum employment—unlike with, with price stability, where we can target a number of 2 percent on average—with maximum employment, there isn’t a single number that we can target. that the— we monitor a broad range of, of, of data about different aspects of the labor market. there’s unemployment, unemployment among different, different age groups, and such. there’s participation. there’s wages. there’s all kinds of flow data. and we look at all of it to try to arrive at a picture of what—of what is maximum employment. so there isn’t—i can’t give you a, a, a set of numbers—for example, a numerical threshold like we used for a time back in 2012, i guess it was. we didn’t do that here. what we said was substantial further progress toward our goals. and what we said was, we would keep,  effectively, we’d—we would give advance warning as we—and, and, you know, more and more clarity—as, as we move forward. and that’s what we’re going to try to do. so what would substantial further progress be? i’d say we have some ground to cover on, on the labor market side. i think we’re, we’re some way away from, from having had substantial further progress with, with max—toward the maximum-employment goal. i would want to see some strong job numbers. and, and that’s, that’s kind of the idea. steve liesman. if, if i could follow up, you talked about one side of the equation. you didn’t—does it mean you feel like you’ve reached your goal when it comes to the inflation side? thank you. chair powell. so inflation is running well above our 2 percent objective and has been for a few months and is expected to run up certainly above our objective for a few months before we believe it’ll, it’ll move back down toward our objective. the question whether we’ve met that objective formally is really one for the committee to make. i can’t—i can’t do that by myself. but it’s clear that, at this time, inflation is actually running above 2 percent. and, and, again, has been and will be, at least we expect it will, in coming months before returning down toward our target. michelle smith. thank you. ann saphir with reuters. ann saphir. hello. can you hear me? [no response] hello. can you hear me? i’m sorry. chair powell. yes, yes. we can hear you. ann saphir. i apologize. i—just to follow up on the question, i want to ask, you know, is it—is it correct to see this as the, the start of the advance notice process, you know,  before a taper? and, and, and also, can you speak to how the recent surge in covid factors into your thinking on, on the taper? thanks. chair powell. so, as you know, we’re, we’re in a process now where what we said is that as—at this meeting and in coming meetings, we’re going to be continuing to assess the economy’s progress toward our goals and give advance notice. we’ll be—try to provide additional clarity about our thinking, both in the—in the postmeeting statement and in the minutes and in the public comments that people make. you know, our, our approach here has been to be as transparent as we can. we have not reached substantial further progress yet. so we’re, we’re not there, and we see our ways as having some—we see ourselves as having some ground to cover to get there. so that’s what i would say. in terms of—in terms of, of covid and the delta strain, i’ll say a couple things. of course, it will have significant health consequences for many. and we need to keep that in mind before we start—before we mention and move to the economic questions. this is a—rising cases in, in a number of parts of the country, and some forecasts are for them to rise quite significantly. we’ll see. what we’ve seen, though, is with successive waves of, of covid over the past year and some months now, there has tended to be less economic—less in the way of economic implications from each wave. and we will see whether that is the case with the delta variety. but it’s, you know, it’s a—it’s certainly a—not an unreasonable expectation. so it, it certainly is plausible if people would pull back from some activities because of the risk of infection. dining out, traveling, schools might—some schools might not reopen. we may just—we may see economic effects from some of that, or it might weigh on, on the return to  the labor market. some people might choose—again, we, we don’t have a strong sense of how that might work out, so we’ll just be monitoring it—monitoring it carefully. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to nick timiraos at the wall street journal. nick timiraos. hi, chair powell. nick timiraos at the wall street journal. in your opening statements in march and april, you noted that a transitory rise in inflation above 2 percent this year would not meet the threshold of moderately exceeding 2 percent for some time, and i noticed you didn’t repeat that qualification last month or today. and, and so, in your view, has the rise in inflation this year met the threshold of moderately exceeding 2 percent for some time? chair powell. that, that would, again, be a question for the committee. but i would really say, the guidance that you’re talking about is really the guidance to do with liftoff, right? that’s—what the guidance is for liftoff, we had to have labor market conditions consistent with full employment, inflation at 2 percent and on track to run—to run moderately above 2 percent for some time. it really isn’t relevant now. it—because we’re really—we’re looking at, at tapering asset purchases. we’re clearly a ways away from considering raising interest rates. it’s not something that, that is on our radar screen right now. you know, so when we get to that question, when we start to get to the question of, of liftoff, which, which we are not at all at now or near now, that’s when we’ll ask that question. that is when that, that will become a real question for us. michelle smith. thank you. jeanna smialek at the new york times. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thank you for taking our questions. i wonder if you could talk a little bit about [inaudible] reacting [inaudible]. you know, does that affect,  affect how you’re thinking about tapering? does it affect how you’re thinking about, you know, potential liftoff down the road? and if you could, just talk a little bit about that. chair powell. jeanna, i’m sorry. for the first 15 seconds of your question, you froze. could you—could you say that again? i apologize. jeanna smialek. oh, yes. no. sorry. yes. so i was wondering if you could talk a little bit about how the divergence in global growth and the sort of multispeed recovery we’re seeing around the world impacts how the fed thinks about its policies. so do you take into account that sort of multispeed recovery when you’re thinking about tapering qe, and do you take, take it into account when you’re thinking about liftoff? chair powell. thanks. so it’s an—it’s an important feature of this recovery is how uneven it is. and, in many cases, that’s related to the fact that some countries have had little in the way of access to, to vaccines. and so they’re seeing significant outbreaks, and it’s weighing on economic activity, whereas other countries—such as the united states, in particular—are having a very strong rebound. and, and now europe is having a stronger rebound as well. so it’s a feature of our economy. now, how does it affect our policy? in, in a couple of ways, potentially. one just is that, in general, economies—and through financial markets and through trade—are, are deeply interconnected now. and so a stronger global economy will lead to more u.s. exports. and, and, you know, that’ll help economic activity. to the extent the global economy is weak and the united states is strong, it’ll—we’ll wind up, you know, we’ll wind up exporting some of our demand through, through imports rather than having, having a lot of exports. that’s one way. another way, though, is more on the risk side. and that is, as long as covid is running loose out there, as long as there’s time and space for the development of new strains, no one’s  really finally safe. these, these strains—there’s no reason they just can’t keep coming and one, you know, one more powerful than the next. we don’t know that. but that’s, that’s, that’s certainly a plausible outcome. now, as, as vaccinations rise, we can nonetheless get back to our economic activity. but, you know, it, it is both the right thing to do and, and very much in our interest to make sure that vaccination happens broadly around the world, just for that reason. michelle smith. thank you. james at the ft. james politi. thank you very much. chair powell, how would you describe the risks to the outlook on inflation at the moment after the last data came out higher than expected? do you believe the risks are, you know, tilted to the upside? and does the committee share that view? or are they in balance? are you still worried that there could be a hit to demand from, from the delta variant that could tilt them sort of to the downside again? if you could give us a sense of that, that would be very helpful. chair powell. sure. i’d be glad to. so if you look, again, if you look at the, the most recent inflation report, what you see is that it came in significantly higher than expected. but essentially all of the overshoot can be tied to a handful of categories. it isn’t the kind of inflation that’s spread broadly across the economy. it’s new, used, and rental cars. it’s airplane tickets. it’s hotels. and it’s a couple of other things. and each of those has a story attached to it that is—that is really about the reopening of the economy. so we look at that, and we think that those are temporary things because the, the supply side will respond. the economy will adapt. we have a very adaptive, adaptable, flexible economy and labor market. and it’s a real—a real asset that we have. and so we think that inflation should move down over time. now, we don’t have any—much confidence, let’s say, in the timing of that or the size of the effects in the near term. i would say, in the near term, that  the, the, the risks to inflation are probably to the upside. i, i, i have some confidence in the—in the medium term, that inflation will move back down. again, it’s hard to say when that will be. i, i, i will say, though, that, you know, we—inflation is half of our mandate. price stability is half of our mandate. and if we were to see inflation moving up to levels persistently that were—that were above, significantly, materially above our goal and particularly if inflation expectations were to move up, we would use our tools to guide inflation back down to 2 percent. so we won’t have an extended period of, of high inflation. we think that, that some of it will, will fall away naturally as the process of reopening the economy moves through. and it could take some time. in any case, we will use our tools over time as appropriate to make sure that we do have inflation that averages 2 percent over time. michelle smith. thank you. victoria at politico. victoria guida. hi, mr. chairman. so bond market pricing seems to suggest that investors think the fed might eventually overtighten. so my question is, do you think that markets have bought into the central bank’s new framework? and how do you balance that with managing inflation concerns? chair powell. well, so in terms of what’s been happening in bond markets, i don’t think there’s a real consensus on, on what explains the moves between the last meeting and this meeting. we’ve seen the long-term yields go down significantly. some of it is a fall in real yields, which may have been connected to—some speculate—connected to sentiment around the, the spread of the delta variant and concern about growth. there was also some decline in inflation compensation, which has significantly reversed. and there, there are also so-called technical factors, which is where you put things that you can’t quite explain. so i, i, i don’t see in any of that that there is really anything that challenges the  credibility of our framework, if, if that’s really your question. we are committed to achieving 2 percent average inflation over time. what we said was that, in particular, when we see a very strong labor market, high levels of employment, low levels of unemployment, that won’t be enough for us to raise interest rates until we see some inflation. of course, what we have today is kind of the opposite. we’ve got, you know, 7 or 8 million people, fewer people, at work than were at work before the pandemic. so we’re, you know, we’re, we’re a ways away from full maximum employment. but we have high inflation, so it’s kind of the opposite case. and we have to—we have to deal with that. any central bank has to deal with that by looking at the inflation and asking whether it is broad based and likely to be persistent and, and, and whether inflation expectations are implicated in a way that, that could cause them to rise. so we’re monitoring that very carefully, and we’re prepared to use our tools as appropriate. but, again, i think our—i think our framework is pretty well understood. and, and i think the real test of it will be down the road when it’s time to think about raising interest rates and, and how we assess, assess that set of issues. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to rich at bloomberg. rich miller. thanks very much, michelle. chairman powell, you, you just alluded to the fact that you’re prepared to use your tools to slow the economy down if need be to—if inflation looks like it’s getting out of control. i want to just try to understand that in the context of the framework and the forward guidance. does that mean you’d be prepared to raise interest rates even if we’re not at maximum employment at that point, should you see this danger of inflation? and, and, two, does it also mean you’d be prepared to raise interest rates even if you are still buying assets? thank you.  chair powell. so there’s a—there’s a part in our statement on longer-run goals and, and monetary policy strategy, which, rich, i’m sure—i’m sure you’re familiar with, which, which talks about that case in which the two goals are in tension. most of the time, if you have high inflation, you also have high employment—they, they tend to go together. this is a situation where they’re temporarily in different directions. we’re not at full employment, but we are having high inflation. we feel like we’re going to be making good progress over the next—over the course of the next year, couple of years, really, toward maximum employment. this is a very strong labor market. if you look at the number of job openings compared to the number of unemployed, it’s—we’re, we’re clearly on a path to a very strong labor market with high participation, low unemployment, high employment, wages moving up across the spectrum. that, that’s, that’s the path that we’re on, and, and it shouldn’t take that long in macroeconomic time to get there. so that’s, that’s what i think is, is really the likely case. and, again, it’s not—it’s not timely for us to be thinking about, about raising interest rates right now. what we’re doing is, we’re, we’re looking at our asset purchases and judging what is right for the economy and judging how we—how close we are to substantial further progress and then—and then tapering after that. the question you asked about, would we raise rates if we hadn’t finished cutting—hadn’t finished the taper, hypothetical question. you know, we’d, we’d face the circumstance at the time. we could always just—you know, one thing one could do would be to just cut asset purchases all the way to zero if you wanted to do that. but it’s, it’s, it’s just hard to—it’s hard to answer what you would do without knowing a lot more about the situation. ideally, you wouldn’t be still buying assets and raising rates because, of course, you’re adding  accommodation by buying and, and removing accommodation by raising rates. so that wouldn’t be ideal. i’ll say that. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to edward lawrence at fox business. edward lawrence. so thank you, mr. chairman. thank you, mr. chairman, for taking the question. now, so you’re talking about jobs. you just said we’re on a path to a very strong job market. you know, we have 9.5 million people unemployed as of the last labor market survey and 9.2 million job openings. so what’s the—what’s the disconnect? is it a skills gap? is it the extended unemployment benefits? is it the fact that people just aren’t willing to relocate? what is the disconnect there? chair powell. it’s a—it’s a really unusual situation to have—to have the ratio of vacancies to unemployed be this high. and we think there are a number of things at work there. maybe the place to start is, is just to say that this is now not so much about people going back to their old jobs. it’s about finding a new job. so that’s a time-intensive, labor-intensive process. and there may be a bit of a speed limit on that. there, there’s research that suggests that there is a speed limit on that. so it’s not like you can have millions of people at the beginning of the recovery going back in a single month because they’re just going back to their old job. this is about job selection, things like that. there may also be some factors that are—that are holding people back, and that’s—this is what surveys say. there are people who, who are reluctant to go back to work because they still feel exposed to covid. these could be jobs where, where there was a lot of, of interaction with the public and where perhaps there’s a family member who’s vulnerable or for whatever reason. there’s also caretakers who are—where, where schools are not fully open and parents are at home or taking care of, of, of older people. and there’s also been very generous  unemployment benefits, which are now rolling off. they’ll be—they’ll be fully rolled off in a couple of months. and all of those factors should, should wane. and, you know, we, we think we should see, because of that, we should see strong job creation moving forward. i mean, ultimately, it’s unusual to see aspects like the job openings number in a context where there are that many unemployed people. that many job openings would typically suggest a tight labor market. and, of course, we hear from businesses all over the country that it’s very hard to hire people. and that may be because people, people are shopping carefully for their next job. i mean, i, i, i think the bottom line on this is, people want to work. if you look at where labor force participation can get, people will go back to work unless they retire. some people will retire. but, generally speaking, americans want to work, and, and they’ll find their way into the jobs that they want. it may take some time, though. michelle smith. thank you. rachel siegel at the washington post. rachel siegel. thank you, michelle. and thank you, chair powell, for taking our questions. i wanted to follow up on what you said about there tending to be less in the way of economic implications from each wave of covid cases. could you elaborate on what you’ve seen to that end during previous waves? and then, looking forward, how vulnerable is the labor market to the delta variant? i’m thinking or wondering if you have concerns that jobs that may have come back in travel or tourism could be susceptible if people started reconsidering their travel plans or if caretakers were suddenly faced with the prospect of schools not reopening. how do you see some of those risks going forward? thank you so much. chair powell. sure. so if you remember the, the summer wave last year of covid, which was largely southern and western states, the economy just performed much better  than anyone expected. you know, we, we were coming off the spring wave, where there were a lot of shutdowns. and then this big second wave hit, and i think the natural thing to do is to expect that, that it would have a real impact on the economy. and it was much less than, than people thought. people—what’s happened is, first of all, many people are vaccinated. they’re going on with their lives. secondly, we’ve kind of learned to live with it. a lot of industries have, have kind of improvised their way around it—particularly, for example, buying a new home. that, that process of buying a new home very quickly moved to much more of a virtual process. and so they were able to, you know, to, to do that. and other industries as well have gone to take-out and, you know, no-contact things. it’s—so that can all—it seems like we’ve learned to, to handle this. now, i think people would like to get back to, to, you know, the way things were. and i, i, i hope to some extent, we will over time. you know, of course, the big wave we had last winter did have significant employment effects, particularly in, you know, hospitality and leisure and other entertainment—other, other areas with a lot of direct contact. a lot of jobs were lost then because that was a very strong wave that happened in, in, in the winter months last year, just before the vaccines arrived. so with delta, we’re just going to have to watch. again, with, with, with a reasonably high percentage of the country vaccinated and the vaccine apparently being effective—we’re not experts on this—but it, it seems like the—a good—a good going-in estimate would be that the effects will probably be less. there probably won’t be significant lockdowns and things like that. but, again, those, those are not decisions for us or, or, or—nor is it something we’re be— we’d be expert in.  in terms of the, the, the channels, you know, i—this is—this is kind of speculation, but it’s pretty—it just is that people, you could imagine school districts deciding to wait a month or two for the—for the—for the delta wave to go. i’m not saying this’ll happen, but that it’s easy to imagine that. it’s also easy to imagine that some people might say, you know what? i’m just going to—i’m just going to wait a couple of months before going back to work. wouldn’t be hard to imagine that happening. if, if schools don’t open, then caretakers have to stay home. and if people don’t go back into the labor force, then the job growth won’t be as strong, those kinds of things. so i don’t—it doesn’t—it doesn’t—again, sitting here today, not being able to really know the future—it doesn’t seem as though the effects will be very large. but there may be effects. and they—it may be that the effect is to slow the economy down just for a period of months—or not. there are many parts of the country where it might not have an effect, and we’re just going to have to, to see what the economic effects are. michelle smith. thank you. now we’ll go to david gura at npr. david gura. thank you, mr. chairman. i was going to ask if you’ve started drafting your jackson hole speech, but i’m going to go in a—in a different direction here. steve liesman asked you about semantics. i’m going to take a cue from him and ask you about the term “transitory,” because i think of you as somebody who’s so lucidly explained policies and programs in recent months and made a real concerted effort to explain them to, to the american public as a whole. i wonder about this term and what you would say to people who don’t know it definitionally, don’t know what it means, and see prices going up and wonder how long they’re going to have to wait.  so just some broader definition from you—i’d like to hear just about what it means or how you understand it. and, and quickly as well, you’ve talked about vaccines a bit. and your colleague in minneapolis has placed a mandate on vaccinating employees coming back to that federal reserve bank. and i wonder if that’s something that you would like to see or expect to see systemwide going forward. chair powell. the concept of “transitory” is really this: it is that the increases will happen. we’re not saying they will reverse. that’s not what “transitory” means. it means that the increases in prices will happen, so there will be inflation but that the process of inflation will stop so that—so that there won’t be further—when, when we think of inflation, we really think of inflation going up year upon year upon year upon year. that’s inflation. when you have inflation for 12 months or whatever it might be—i’m just taking an example; i’m not making an estimate—then, then you have a price increase, but you don’t have an inflation process. and so part of that just is that, if it doesn’t affect longer-term inflation expectations, then it’s very likely not to infect—to affect the process of inflation going forward. so what, what i mean by “transitory” is just something that doesn’t leave a permanent mark on the inflation process. again, we don’t mean—i don’t mean that, that, that, that, you know, producers are going to take those price increases back. that’s, that’s not the idea. it’s just that they won’t go on indefinitely. so to the extent people are, are, are implementing price increases because raw materials are going up or labor costs or something’s going up, you know, the question, really, for inflation really is, does that mean they’re going to go up the next year by the same amount? so you’re going to be in a process where inflation, the inflation process, gets going. and, and that happens because people’s expectations about future inflation move up. and we don’t  think that’s happening. there’s no evidence that it’s happening. all the evidence is that it’s not happening. but, nonetheless, we have to watch this very carefully because this is—you know, we have two mandates: maximum employment and price stability. price stability, for us, means inflation averaging 2 percent over time. and so we’ve got to be very careful about that. but, but i, i, i think it’s a good point that it’s, it’s a term—what it really means is temporary. but then you’ve got to understand that it doesn’t mean that the—that the increases will be taken back. some of them will be, but, but that’s not really what it means. in terms of—so we’re, we’re working virtually here, and we’ll be coming back down the road in a couple of months, starting to bring people back here at the board of governors in washington. and, you know, we’re going to follow public health guidance and things like that. we really haven’t made the fundamental decisions about exactly what that will look like. and it’ll depend on, to some extent, on what—on what, you know, cdc guidance looks like when we actually do bring people back in. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to michael mckee at bloomberg tv. michael mckee. chairman, i wanted to ask you a little bit about your taper timeline in the sense that you said you want a couple more months of data. and the statement says that the fed is going to use—to, to evaluate the developments in the two markets, in jobs and inflation, in coming meetings. does that suggest that we wouldn’t see anything before september or november in your meetings? and i know a lot of people on wall street have basically felt you’re going to lay out your taper plans at jackson hole. is that—is that the plan, or are we not going to see anything until the fall? chair powell. so in any decisions about the timing, and i did not—if i—if i said we’re looking at wanting a couple more months of data, i wasn’t—i’m not meaning to suggest  anything about a particular time at which we might taper, because we really have not made that decision. all i’m saying is, is, we’re not at substantial further progress. there’s a range of views on, on what timing will be appropriate. and those views ultimately track, track back to people’s views about the economy and, and what will happen as we make progress towards, towards our—towards our goal. so that’s, that’s really what it is. and i, i—we will, of course, as we—you know, we’re going to continue to try to provide clarity as appropriate on, on timing, pace, and composition. but, today, i’ve, i’ve given you what i can give you because, again, this, this was the first, really, i would say, deep dive on the issues of timing, pace, and composition. and it was a good meeting. and—but no decisions are made, and, and i’m just not in a position to, to give you much guidance, really any guidance, on the actual timing. i—but i will say we’re making progress. we expect further progress. and we expect that, if, if things go well, then we will—we will reach that goal. and when we reach it and the committee is comfortable that we have reached it, then, then we’ll taper at that point. i can’t, i really—there’s nothing i can say about jackson hole. you know, i’m in—we’re in the process of writing that speech. and i am going to give a speech, and—but i, i, i wouldn’t want to—i wouldn’t want to say what will be in there at this point. michael mckee. well, if i could follow up, several people have recently noted that the fed has got the markets working well. and you’ve got bank loans up. in other words, you’ve stimulated demand. but savers and companies, like insurance companies and pension funds, are getting hammered by the low rates. and they’re wondering if the balance hasn’t started to shift away from benefiting the economy to doing more harm than good.  chair powell. we—asset purchases were just a key part of our response to the critical phase of the crisis. they, they really helped us restore market function to these key markets, really, on which—on which, which are very, very important to our economy and the global economy. and then they were a big part of, of creating accommodative financial conditions to support demand. they were strongly needed. it was that commitment to continue asset purchases that provided strong support for the economy and, and has been a part of the story for why the economy is so strong right now. so we said we would taper when we—when we achieve substantial further progress. and, and, you know, we’re going to honor that commitment. i mean, it’s—and, and, again, we’re talking about it right now and meeting by meeting and, and moving in that direction. we will taper when we reach that goal. and we’ll provide more, you know, more clarity on that as we go, as is appropriate. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to hannah lang at the american banker. hannah lang. hi. you’ve been asked a lot previously if the fed’s monetary policy at all contributes to inequality, but i was really curious to know where you think the fed’s regulatory policy lands, particularly if you think that the fed’s bank capital requirements have had the effect of penalizing lower-income households seeking loans. basically, is it possible to achieve the balance of a safe banking system with one that also provides equitable loan access? thanks. chair powell. well, i think strong capital requirements are essential for banks, particularly for the largest banks. and i think that an undercapitalized banking system, as we’ve seen, can be a real threat to the economy and most—mostly, or to, to the greatest extent, to  people at the lower end of the income spectrum. so if you look back at not this previous—not this crisis but the previous one, the bank—the banking system was undercapitalized. so higher capital requirements are, are, you know, are, are really a good thing because they allow banks to weather downturns and continue to perform the functions that they perform. i think it’s other tools that we have to—and the fed has some of these tools, congress has some of these tools, other agencies have some of these tools—to assure or support the wide availability of credit, particularly to low- and moderate-income communities. so that’s cra. we enforce cra. we’re working on a—on a new cra proposal right now with the other banking agencies, and we think it’s going to be—it’s going to be good and will support the flow of credit to low- and moderate-income households. it’s also the anti—anti– lending discrimination statutes that we enforce. and it’s some of the programs that congress has in place to support the flow of credit to low- and moderate-income communities. i, i don’t think it’s capital standards at all. i think capital standards work the other way. strong capital is what enables banks to continue to serve their communities, including low- and moderate-income communities. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to chris rugaber at the ap. christopher rugaber. hi. thank you for taking my question. chair powell, i guess i wanted to ask about the last—when you were before congress earlier this month, you mentioned, i think, something along the lines of, it won’t take too long before we see if you’re right about inflation and its temporary aspect. you also mentioned learning a lot more in the next six months about the economy. can you tell us a little more of what you mean by that? when do you think you’ll get a clean reading on inflation that is free of most of the distortions that we’re seeing now?  chair powell. right. so with inflation, as i mentioned, we’re, we look not just at the headline number, but we look at all the components that go into the calculation of inflation. and if you do that, if you look under the hood, what you see is not that, widely, across the whole range of goods and services that, that are in the economy, we’re seeing upward, upward pressure on prices. that’s not really what we’re seeing. what we’re seeing is a handful of things that are really—that really account for the, the overshoot of inflation. and, as i mentioned, it’s things like cars. you know, new, used, and rental cars have moved up in price because of the car shortage because of the semiconductor shortage. and housing—sorry, hotels and air, air fares have moved back up, but that really just is retracing the very large downward movement in prices that they had before. so that’s, that’s a big, big part of, of why the inflation readings are so high. and those don’t—those, frankly, don’t carry significant implications in the long run for the—for inflation or for the american economy. so what i said was, we, we’re going to see whether these things—we don’t need to see everything do what lumber prices have done. so if you look at lumber prices, they went up and then they went down. so what we want to see is these other things. do they—do they—do the prices flatten out? do they actually move down? if they flatten out, then their, their contribution to inflation becomes zero over time so that they’re not contributing to inflation. and so, if we start to see those things happen fairly widely among the—among the things that have really moved up quickly, then we’ll, we’ll—they won’t all happen at once or happen quickly—but we’ll know that our basic understanding of the situation is broadly correct. and i don’t think it will take, or what i said was, i don’t think it’ll take a very long time to see whether that’s the case. it, it, it is probably the case that, frankly, the, the overall  reopening of the economy is going to play out over a period of time. this is a historic, world historical event, that the global economy is now reopening. it’s not going to—it’s not going to happen quickly. it’s going to take some time. and it’s going to be very uneven, as we discussed before. but i think we will—we will know, you know, when we know. but i don’t think it will take that long. i don’t want to put a number on it. but i do think that, that, if we see those things happening, we’ll know that we have the story basically right. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to brian cheung at yahoo finance. brian cheung. hi, chairman powell. brian cheung, yahoo finance. i’m just wondering if you could provide a little bit more color in terms of how you’re thinking about mortgage-backed securities purchases as you inch towards taper. within the context of home prices continuing to rise, we’ve heard a lot of people talk about the idea that maybe they’d like to cool off on, specifically, the mbs purchases. is that more because of the optics, or is it because there’s an observed relationship from the committee’s view between mbs purchases under qe and the hot housing market? thanks. chair powell. so a number of participants raised that—the questions around mbs and tapering at, at today’s meeting, as a matter of fact, and yesterday’s meeting. and i’ll just say that, generally speaking, i don’t think and—i don’t think that—i think that treasury and mbs purchases affect financial conditions in very similar ways. there may be modest differences in terms of, of contribution to housing prices, but it’s, it’s not something that’s big. it’s not—it’s—so where i think we are is, there, there really is little support for the idea of tapering mbs earlier than treasuries. i think we will taper them at the same time. it seems likely, based on where people are now. the idea of reducing mbs purchases at a somewhat  faster pace than treasuries does have some attraction for some people—others, not so much. and i think it’s something that we’ll be continuing to discuss. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to michael derby. michael derby. thank you very much. so i wanted to ask you about the standing repo facility and get your sense of what you think it will do for market trading conditions. and also, kind of in a similarly related point, the reverse repo numbers have just gotten even bigger since you raised the reverse repo rate at the last fed meeting. and, you know, are you concerned to see, you know, nearly $1 trillion a day, you know, pouring in through that facility? chair powell. so on the standing repo facility, what is it going to do? so it, it really is a backstop. so it’s, it’s set at 25 basis points, so out of the money, and it’s, it’s there to help address pressures in money market—money markets that could impede the effective implementation of monetary policy. so, really, it’s, it’s to support the function of—functioning of monetary policy and its, its effectiveness. that’s the purpose of it. and it’s set up with that purpose in mind. your question on, on the, the [on]rrp, so we think it’s doing what it’s supposed to do, what we expect of it to do, which is to help provide a floor for money market rates and help ensure that the federal funds, funds rate stays within the target range. you know, it’s essentially, essentially, what’s happening is that it just results in a lower aggregate amount of federal reserve liabilities that are in banks in the form of reserves and a higher amount of federal reserve liabilities in money market funds in the form of overnight rrp balances. so that, that’s all that’s really happening there. and we expect it to be high for some time. it’s being driven, of course, by, by the relatively lower quantity of treasury bills and, and,  and also the onset of the debt ceiling and the decline in the tga, things like that. so we don’t— we don’t have a problem with, with what it’s doing. it’s kind of doing the job we expected. michael derby. and you don’t see any issues with, like, disaggregating, you know, markets from, you know, investing in private money market securities? you know, like, the idea that the fed’s footprint in money markets is getting too big, you don’t see any issues there? chair powell. not, not really. not at this point. i mean, money markets, private money market funds are, are choosing to, to invest because the rates are attractive. at some point, the rates will not be so attractive as, as the whole rate cluster normalizes, and, and you’ll see it shrink back down. michael derby. okay. thank you. michelle smith. thanks. let’s go to greg robb at marketwatch. greg robb. hi. thanks for taking my question. chair powell, i was going to go back to inflation a little bit. i’m just kind of surprised by your tone. it, it seems like you’re just sort of warning that, if inflation gets too high, you know, the fed will act. isn’t it true that, i mean, a little inflation is good for the economy and, and that we—if somehow maybe we can get the economy out of this sort of place where we’re always going to be close to the zero lower bound, isn’t there a good story to tell, and you’re sort of panicking people? chair powell. i certainly don’t, don’t have that in mind. no. look, we—as you know, we’re targeting a moderate overshoot of 2 percent inflation for some time. we, we want inflation expectations to be centered on, on 2 percent. we feel like they may be a little bit below that. so the bigger picture is that, you know, that, that, that would be a healthy thing. this is a different thing. this is—this is not that. that was the kind of inflation we were thinking about that comes from, you know, from a very, very strong labor market and a—and a booming  economy maybe. that, that was the kind of inflation—this, this is something different. this is really driven by the supply side, which is not able to hand—to handle this big spike in demand that we’re seeing. as the economy reopens with vaccination and fiscal support and monetary policy support, the supply side—just all over the world, you’re seeing the same thing, which is, it just can’t keep up. and there are labor shortages in, in a lot of places, the same sort of thing. so, you know, there’s, there’s absolutely no sense of panic. i just—i’ve explained, i think, several times here today that the best—my, my best estimate is that this is something that will pass. it’s really a shock to the economy that will pass through. and, you know, if you—if you look at where forecasters are—people who actually write down a forecast for a living—very, very strongly they see it that way. now, we—but, you know, are—we’re actually responsible for this, though, so we have to take seriously the risk, the risk case, which is that inflation will be more persistent, that it might actually move inflation expectations up, and that we might—that the kind of things that might require a response. we, again, we don’t see that now. but we, we have to be on the alert for it. and people have to understand and believe that we will react if, if we need to. and we will. but, again, it’s not—it’s not my base case. my base case is that—is, as i’ve said repeatedly, is that inflation will move back down. and no, we’re not—we, we have not at all changed our view, and i haven’t changed my view that inflation running above 2 percent, moderately above 2 percent, is a desirable thing. this is not moderately above 2 percent. this is well above 2 percent. but it’s also not the kind of inflation we were looking for. this is really driven by a supply-side shock. greg robb. thank you.  michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to don lee at the los angeles times for the last question. don lee. hi, chair powell. i wonder if you could talk about wages. many workers seem to have gotten some good wage gains in, in recent months. what can workers generally expect going forward? and it doesn’t sound like you’re concerned about rising wages feeding into broader inflation. is that right? chair powell. so wages have moved up. a lot of that is driven by new hires. and it’s—a lot of it is driven at relatively low-paid jobs in the service industries as people come back. so that’s not troubling. and we, we don’t see—there, there is a form of wage inflation that can lead to price inflation, and we’re not seeing that right now. and that really is if what we call “unit labor costs” move up and, and, and, which really puts—move up in a way that is—that is hard for companies to manage and puts them in a situation where they have to accept substantially lower margins or raise prices. now, when it happens gradually, when that—if you—we’ve seen in a long expansion, sometimes unit labor costs do move up and, and put some pressure on margins. in a long expansion, that’s been happening late in the expansion. that’s not a problem, either. the problem is if it happens in a way that pushes firms broadly into raising prices. it was called the “wage–price spiral.” we don’t see that now. this is something that was a feature of the high inflationary era of the great inflation, but it’s not a feature now. and we don’t see that now. of course, we’ll be watching it. and this is one of the reasons why we’re watching so carefully to see whether labor force—whether people do come back and accept jobs. given the very large number of job openings and the very large number of unemployed people, we’d like to see, you know, those—  some matching going on there so people get back to work. we think labor supply would be— would be a healthy thing. you know, but wages moving up across the spectrum, consistent with inflation and productivity, is a—is a good thing. michelle smith. thank you, chair powell. and thank you all.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a discussion of developments in financial markets. although there were notable moves in some asset prices over the intermeeting period, overall financial conditions ended the period little changed at historically accommodative levels. market participants seemed to interpret communications associated with the june fomc meeting as signaling a less accommodative path of monetary policy than had been anticipated. implied rates on interest rate futures initially rose following the meeting but subsequently retraced, and expectations regarding the path of the target federal funds rate over the next few years ended the period only modestly changed. longer-term yields fell notably over the period, with the declines concentrated in far-forward rates. a significant portion of these movements seemed to reflect changes in term premiums. market participants pointed to a number of factors as driving the movement in longerterm yields, most prominently including federal reserve policy communications, investor positioning, and changes in expectations regarding the course of the pandemic. with respect to the path of net asset purchases, respondents to the open market desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants expected communications on asset purchases to evolve gradually, with signals anticipated over coming months regarding both the committee’s assessment of conditions constituting “substan-  minutes of the meeting of july 27–28, 2021 page 3 tial further progress” and details on tapering plans. almost 60 percent of respondents anticipated the first reduction in the pace of net asset purchases to come in january, though, on average, respondents placed somewhat more weight than in the june surveys on the possibility of tapering beginning somewhat earlier. with respect to the pace of tapering, respondents continued to anticipate that the committee would take a gradual approach. while market participants discussed the possibility of an earlier or faster-than-proportional reduction in the pace of net purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs), most survey respondents appeared to expect the timing and pace of tapering of net purchases of agency mbs and treasury securities to be similar. the manager turned next to a discussion of developments in operations and money markets over the period. following the june meeting, overnight rates rose in line with the technical adjustment in administered rates and were relatively stable for the remainder of the period. overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) take-up jumped by over $200 billion after the technical adjustment took effect, as government-sponsored enterprises moved balances held in unremunerated federal reserve deposit accounts into the higher-yielding on rrp investments. government money market funds also increased their participation in the facility amid a continued decline in treasury bills outstanding and downward pressure on overnight rates. overall, market participants reported that the technical adjustment went smoothly and that, with overnight rates having moved further away from zero, concerns about the functioning of short-term funding markets had diminished. looking ahead, market participants were beginning to focus on the potential effects of changes in the treasury general account at the federal reserve and treasury bill issuance over coming months in connection with the debt ceiling. the manager noted that, if a number of counterparties reached the per-counterparty limit on their on rrp investments and downward pressure on overnight rates emerged, it may become appropriate to lift the limit. establishment of standing repurchase agreement facilities finally, the manager summarized the proposed terms for the standing repurchase agreement (repo) facility (srf) and the foreign and international monetary authorities (fima) repo facility. in questions and comments following the manager’s briefing, participants expressed broad support for the establishment of the srf and fima repo facility. the vast majority of participants supported the proposed terms, although a few participants raised questions, including whether the proposed aggregate cap of $500 billion was necessary, whether the collateral eligible in srf operations should be limited to treasury securities only, and how the setting of the minimum bid rate in srf operations would be expected to evolve over time relative to the primary credit rate and the interest on reserve balances rate. in general, participants viewed the srf and fima repo facility as important new tools, serving in backstop roles, that would support effective policy implementation and smooth market functioning. participants anticipated that the committee would learn more about how these facilities operate over time and noted that it could adjust some parameters of the facilities on the basis of that experience. the committee voted unanimously to approve the establishment of the srf. all but one member of the committee voted to approve the fima repo facility. governor bowman abstained from voting on the fima repo facility and noted that she would have preferred that the liquidity arrangements accessible to foreign official institutions be maintained only during periods of extraordinary financial market stress rather than through a standing facility. standing repurchase agreement facility resolution the federal open market committee (the “committee”) authorizes and directs the open market desk at the federal reserve bank of new york (the “selected bank”), for the system open market account (“soma”), to conduct operations in which it offers to purchase securities, subject to an agreement to resell (“repurchase agreement transactions”). the repurchase agreement transactions hereby authorized and directed shall (i) include only u.s. treasury securities, agency debt securities, and agency mortgage-backed securities; (ii) be conducted as open market operations with primary dealers and depository institutions as participants; (iii) be conducted with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent; (iv) be offered on an overnight basis (except that the open market desk at the selected bank may extend the term for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions); and (v) be subject to an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. these operations shall be conducted by the open market desk at the selected bank until otherwise directed by the committee.  page 4 federal open market committee standing fima repurchase agreement resolution the federal open market committee (the “committee”) authorizes and directs the open market desk at the federal reserve bank of new york (the “selected bank”), for the system open market account (“soma”), to offer to purchase u.s. treasury securities subject to an agreement to resell (“repurchase agreement transactions”) with foreign central bank and international accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank (the “foreign accounts”). the repurchase agreement transactions hereby authorized and directed shall (i) include only u.s. treasury securities; (ii) be conducted with foreign accounts approved in advance by the foreign currency subcommittee (the “subcommittee”); (iii) be conducted at an offering rate of 0.25 percent; (iv) be offered on an overnight basis (except that the open market desk at the selected bank may extend the term for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions); and (v) be subject to a per-counterparty limit of $60 billion per day. the subcommittee may approve changes in the offering rate, the maturity of the transactions, eligible foreign accounts counterparties (either by approving or removing account access), and the counterparty limit; and the subcommittee shall keep the committee informed of any such changes. these transactions shall be undertaken by the open market desk at the selected bank until otherwise directed by the committee. the open market desk at the selected bank will also report at least annually to the committee on facility usage and the list of approved account holders. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. discussion of asset purchases participants discussed aspects of the federal reserve’s asset purchases, including progress made toward the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals since the adoption of the asset purchase guidance in december 2020. they also considered the question of how asset purchases might be adjusted once economic conditions met the standards of that guidance. participants agreed that their discussion at this meeting would be helpful background for the committee’s future decisions about modifying asset purchases. no decisions regarding future adjustments to asset purchases were made at this meeting. the participants’ discussion was preceded by staff presentations that reviewed the principal channels through which asset purchases exert effects on financial conditions and the economy, with a focus on the implications of these channels for the committee’s deliberations regarding future adjustments to the federal reserve’s asset purchases. the presentations noted that, in the staff’s standard empirical modeling framework, the effect of asset purchases on financial and economic conditions occurred primarily via their influence on the expected path of private-sector holdings of longer-term assets. in that framework, larger federal reserve holdings of these assets reduced private-sector holdings, exerting downward pressure on term premiums and, consequently, keeping longer-term interest rates and overall financial conditions more accommodative than they otherwise would be. the staff noted that, because plausible alternative approaches to the tapering of asset purchases would likely not lead to significant differences in the expected path of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, these approaches would have similar financial and economic effects in the staff’s standard framework. the presentations highlighted, however, that alternative tapering approaches could have significant financial and economic effects not fully captured in the staff’s standard empirical framework. in particular, changes in asset purchases could be interpreted by the public as signaling a shift in the committee’s view of the economic outlook or in its overall policy strategy, with implications for the expected path of the federal funds rate. changes in the flow of asset purchases could also influence yields, but this influence would likely be modest outside of periods of stressed financial market conditions. in their discussion of considerations related to asset purchases, various participants noted that these purchases were an important part of the monetary policy toolkit and a critical aspect of the federal reserve’s response to the economic effects of the pandemic, supporting smooth financial market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, which aided the flow of credit to households and businesses and supported the recovery. participants discussed a broad range of labor market and inflation indicators. all participants assessed that the economy had made progress toward the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals since the adoption of the guidance on asset purchases in december. most participants judged that the committee’s standard of “substantial further progress” toward the maximum-employment goal had not yet been met. at the same time, most participants remarked that this standard had been achieved with respect to the price-  minutes of the meeting of july 27–28, 2021 page 5 stability goal. a few participants noted, however, that the transitory nature of this year’s rise in inflation, as well as the recent declines in longer-term yields and in market-based measures of inflation compensation, cast doubt on the degree of progress that had been made toward the price-stability goal since december. looking ahead, most participants noted that, provided that the economy were to evolve broadly as they anticipated, they judged that it could be appropriate to start reducing the pace of asset purchases this year because they saw the committee’s “substantial further progress” criterion as satisfied with respect to the price-stability goal and as close to being satisfied with respect to the maximumemployment goal. various participants commented that economic and financial conditions would likely warrant a reduction in coming months. several others indicated, however, that a reduction in the pace of asset purchases was more likely to become appropriate early next year because they saw prevailing conditions in the labor market as not being close to meeting the committee’s “substantial further progress” standard or because of uncertainty about the degree of progress toward the price-stability goal. participants agreed that the committee would provide advance notice before making changes to its balance sheet policy. participants expressed a range of views on the appropriate pace of tapering asset purchases once economic conditions satisfied the criterion laid out in the committee’s guidance. many participants saw potential benefits in a pace of tapering that would end net asset purchases before the conditions currently specified in the committee’s forward guidance on the federal funds rate were likely to be met. at the same time, participants indicated that the standards for raising the target range for the federal funds rate were distinct from those associated with tapering asset purchases and remarked that the timing of those actions would depend on the course of the economy. several participants noted that an earlier start to tapering could be accompanied by more gradual reductions in the purchase pace and that such a combination could mitigate the risk of an excessive tightening in financial conditions in response to a tapering announcement. participants exchanged views on what the composition of asset purchases should be during the tapering process. most participants remarked that they saw benefits in reducing the pace of net purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs proportionally in order to end both sets of purchases at the same time. these participants observed that such an approach would be consistent with the committee’s understanding that purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs had similar effects on broader financial conditions and played similar roles in the transmission of monetary policy, or that these purchases were not intended as credit allocation. some of these participants remarked, however, that they welcomed further discussion of the appropriate composition of asset purchases during the tapering process. several participants commented on the benefits that they saw in reducing agency mbs purchases more quickly than treasury securities purchases, noting that the housing sector was exceptionally strong and did not need either actual or perceived support from the federal reserve in the form of agency mbs purchases or that such purchases could be interpreted as a type of credit allocation. participants commented on other factors that were relevant for their consideration of future adjustments to the pace of asset purchases. many participants noted that, when a reduction in the pace of asset purchases became appropriate, it would be important that the committee clearly reaffirm the absence of any mechanical link between the timing of tapering and that of an eventual increase in the target range for the federal funds rate. a few participants suggested that the committee would need to be mindful of the risk that a tapering announcement that was perceived to be premature could bring into question the committee’s commitment to its new monetary policy framework. with respect to the effects of the pandemic, several participants indicated that they would adjust their views on the appropriate path of asset purchases if the economic effects of new strains of the virus turned out to be notably worse than currently anticipated and significantly hindered progress toward the committee’s goals. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the july 27–28 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) had increased in the second quarter at a faster pace than in the first quarter of the year. indicators of labor market conditions were mixed in june, though labor demand remained strong. consumer price inflation through may—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the personal consumption expenditures (pce) price index—had picked up notably, largely reflecting transitory factors. total nonfarm payroll employment rose sharply in june, with job gains widespread across industries and especially strong job growth in the leisure and hospitality sector. as of june, total payroll employment had retraced  page 6 federal open market committee more than two-thirds of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. the unemployment rate edged higher and stood at 5.9 percent in june, and the unemployment rates for african americans and hispanics remained well above the national average. the labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio were unchanged in june. may private-sector job openings, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, remained at the highest recorded level since the survey’s inception in 2000. initial claims for regular state unemployment insurance were little changed, on net, since mid-june. weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by federal reserve board staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp that were available through the first part of july suggested that the pace of private employment gains had remained strong. average hourly earnings for all employees rose further in june. recent monthly increases in average hourly earnings appeared to reflect a combination of strong labor demand and increased difficulties in hiring that had more than offset the downward pressure on average earnings from disproportionately large employment gains in lower-wage industries. information from compensation measures that were judged to be less affected by shifts in the composition of the workforce was mixed: a staff measure of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the adp data had stepped up noticeably in june relative to earlier in the year; by contrast, the wage growth tracker measure constructed by the federal reserve bank of atlanta had not shown a similar pickup. recent 12-month change measures of inflation, using either pce prices or the consumer price index (cpi), had been boosted by base effects as the extremely low inflation readings from the spring of 2020 rolled out of the calculation. in addition, a surge in demand as the economy reopened further, combined with production bottlenecks and supply constraints, had pushed up recent monthly price increases. total pce price inflation was 3.9 percent over the 12 months ending in may, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in may. in contrast, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 1.9 percent in may. in june, the 12-month change in the cpi was 5.4 percent, while the core cpi rose 4.5 percent over the same period. in the second quarter of 2021, the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many in- dicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, had more than reversed the moderate decline recorded in the middle of last year and had returned to the level that prevailed in 2014, when actual inflation was relatively modest. real pce appeared to have risen in the second quarter at a pace similar to that seen in the first quarter, supported by previous rounds of federal stimulus payments and reductions in social distancing. even so, consumer spending appeared to have been held back some as producers struggled to meet demand. similarly, despite very strong demand for housing, incoming data suggested that residential investment spending had declined in the second quarter as materials shortages and limited stocks of homes for sale temporarily restrained activity in that sector. available indicators suggested that growth in business fixed investment had slowed sharply in the second quarter, reflecting disruptions to motor vehicle production and aircraft deliveries and a faster rate of decline in nonresidential structures investment. growth in manufacturing output had picked up modestly in the second quarter. although production in the chemicals industry had rebounded from the weather-related disruptions earlier in the year, the supply chain issues faced by a number of other industries, particularly the motor vehicle industry, continued to weigh on overall factory output. total real government purchases appeared to have moved lower in the second quarter after having risen in the first quarter. available data suggested that federal nondefense purchases had dropped following a firstquarter surge in pandemic-related expenditures and that defense purchases were little changed. however, indicators of real state and local purchases pointed to a modest second-quarter increase in this component of government spending. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit remained high in may. real goods imports in may retraced only a bit of their april decline, but they were still at the second-highest level on record. real goods exports edged down in may and remained below pre-covid-19 levels. bottlenecks in the global semiconductor industry continued to weigh on exports and imports of automotive products, and shipping congestion likely continued to restrain trade overall. although international travel recovered further in may, exports and imports of services remained depressed relative to pre-pandemic levels.  minutes of the meeting of july 27–28, 2021 page 7 incoming data suggested that, after a weak start to the year, foreign economic activity accelerated in the second quarter. the improvements were concentrated in the advanced foreign economies and china, supported by vaccine rollouts, the unwinding of public health restrictions, economic adaptation to the virus, and the reopening of the services sector. the situation was quite different in some emerging market economies (emes) whose low vaccination rates left them vulnerable to new waves of infections. although new covid-19 cases fell dramatically in india after the surge in may and june, the situation deteriorated markedly in several southeast asian countries, whose cases and deaths rose to all-time highs. in addition, the increased prevalence of new virus variants, particularly the delta variant, underscored the continued uncertainty about the foreign outlook. inflation rose further in most foreign economies, reflecting a reversal of price declines seen in the spring of 2020, higher energy and commodity prices, and supply bottlenecks. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, fluctuations in financial markets appeared to be driven by less-accommodativethan-expected june fomc communications, a reduction in investor perceptions of the risk of persistently high inflation, increased concerns about the rapid spread of the delta variant, and stronger-than-anticipated inflation data. longer-dated treasury yields fell, largely reflecting declines in real yields, while longer-horizon forward measures of inflation compensation also declined. domestic equity prices rose moderately, and corporate bond spreads remained near the low end of their historical ranges. short-term funding markets were stable, while participation in the on rrp facility increased further, to its highest level since the facility was put in place. market-based financing conditions were accommodative, and bank lending standards eased for most loan categories. the treasury yield curve flattened, on net, with the 2-year yield about unchanged, the 5-year yield declining a bit, and the 10- and 30-year yields each decreasing about 30 basis points. the decline in longer-term treasury yields was associated with a drop in real yields implied by treasury inflation-protected securities (tips), with the 10-year real yield down about 25 basis points. meanwhile, shorter-horizon measures of inflation compensation ended the period modestly higher, but longerterm forward measures fell notably. on net, the marketimplied path of the policy rate was little changed for horizons up to late 2023, while it shifted lower beyond those horizons. broad stock market prices rose moderately over the intermeeting period, supported in part by some strong second-quarter earnings reports that bolstered investor risk sentiment. however, some prices declined for stocks that historically have moved more closely with economic conditions—such as stocks for smaller companies and for firms in cyclical industries—as did stock prices for firms in sectors such as airlines and hotels that were negatively affected by the pandemic. bank stock prices also fell. one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—spiked to reach a two-month high. for the intermeeting period as a whole, however, the vix was little changed, on net, and remained somewhat above its average pre-pandemic levels. spreads of yields on corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity treasury securities were little changed, and spreads of benchmark municipal bond indexes increased moderately, although both remained below their pre-pandemic levels. short-term funding markets were stable over the intermeeting period. following the actions at the june fomc meeting to increase both the interest rate on excess reserves and the on rrp rate by 5 basis points, the effective federal funds rate rose 4 basis points, reaching 10 basis points, while the secured overnight financing rate rose 4 basis points, reaching 5 basis points. these funding rates remained at these levels for most of the period. participation in the federal reserve’s on rrp operations continued to increase to its highest level since the facility was put in place, from an average of $340 billion in the previous intermeeting period to an average of around $800 billion over the current intermeeting period, and reached almost $1 trillion on the june quarterend. the increase in participation was driven in part by larger investments from money market funds, as ongoing reductions in net treasury bill issuance contributed to downward pressure on yields of other investment options available to these funds. concerns about the worldwide spread of the delta variant weighed somewhat on risk sentiment in global financial markets over the intermeeting period. the dollar broadly appreciated, longer-term yields in major advanced foreign economies decreased notably, and most major foreign equity indexes declined moderately. equity markets in china and hong kong underperformed notably amid increased regulatory uncertainty in china. in addition, eme sovereign credit spreads widened slightly, but capital flows into dedicated eme funds remained modestly positive.  page 8 federal open market committee several foreign central banks scaled back their asset purchase programs. the bank of canada and the reserve bank of australia reduced the pace of their asset purchases, and the reserve bank of new zealand unexpectedly announced that it would halt its asset purchases in july. in emerging markets, the central banks of brazil and mexico raised rates in order to reduce inflationary pressures. in contrast, the people’s bank of china cut the broad reserve requirement ratio for banks to support economic growth. the european central bank completed its strategy review, adopting a 2 percent symmetric inflation target, and revised forward guidance on its policy rate. financing conditions faced by nonfinancial firms in capital markets continued to be broadly accommodative over the intermeeting period, as corporate bond spreads remained near the low end of their historical distributions. gross issuance of corporate bonds slowed from its brisk pace in may but remained solid, and gross issuance of leveraged loans was also robust. equity raised through traditional initial public offerings rebounded noticeably, while equity raised through seasoned equity offerings continued to be moderate in june. meanwhile, equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies remained subdued. commercial and industrial (c&i) loans outstanding at banks continued to decline in june, with forgiveness of paycheck protection program loans more than offsetting the volumes of new loan originations. in the july senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported easing standards and nearly all terms, on net, for c&i loans over the second quarter. the july sloos also indicated that the level of standards on c&i loans returned to the easier end of the range that had prevailed since 2005. banks surveyed in the july sloos reported that demand for c&i loans had improved over the second quarter; however, market commentary suggested that demand was still generally weak. the credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations remained stable over the intermeeting period. the volume of credit rating upgrades for nonfinancial corporate bonds and leveraged loans moderately outpaced downgrades in june. corporate bond and leveraged loan defaults also remained low. financing conditions in the municipal bond market remained accommodative over the intermeeting period, with municipal bond yields edging down to record lows. issuance of municipal bonds was solid in the case of higher-rated bonds, while it was still below pre-pandemic levels for speculative-grade and unrated securities. the credit quality of municipal debt appeared stable, although pandemic-related risks to state and local government finances remained. financing conditions facing small businesses remained relatively tight, and their loan demand was generally weak. although the july sloos banks reported, on net, easier lending standards for c&i loans to small firms over the second quarter, industry commentary suggested that the lending standards of community banks and of other lenders not included in the sloos remained relatively tight. furthermore, the results of a separate survey suggested that the share of firms that did not want to borrow remained near its all-time high. meanwhile, loan performance for small businesses continued to improve, with delinquency rates continuing to decline in may. for commercial real estate (cre) financed through capital markets, financing conditions remained accommodative. spreads of agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) were generally at or below pre-pandemic levels. issuance of agency cmbs remained robust and issuance of non-agency cmbs strengthened notably in june. delinquency rates on mortgages in cmbs pools were little changed but continued to be elevated on hotel and retail mortgages. meanwhile, bank-based financing conditions for cre remained relatively tight. cre loan growth at banks remained weak in the second quarter in comparison with pre-pandemic levels. in the july sloos, banks reported that, despite some easing over the second quarter, the levels of cre lending standards were still tight relative to the midpoint of the range of standards that had prevailed since 2005. financing conditions in the residential real estate market remained accommodative. this was particularly true for stronger borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. in addition, according to the july sloos, bank lending standards for jumbo loans eased over the second quarter to near their pre-pandemic levels. however, although broad financing conditions for lower-score federal housing administration borrowers also continued to ease, their credit standards remained tighter than before the pandemic. mortgage rates ticked down over the intermeeting period, in line with rates on mbs and 10-year treasury securities. furthermore, the spread of mortgage rates to mbs yields was close to pre-pandemic levels after having widened significantly at the start of  minutes of the meeting of july 27–28, 2021 page 9 the pandemic. mortgage originations for home purchases and refinancing were fairly robust through june. financing conditions for consumer credit remained accommodative. consumer credit jumped in may and remained strong in june, reflecting a rebound in credit card balances and continued robust growth in auto loans. banks in the july sloos reported stronger demand and easier standards for both credit cards and auto loans over the second quarter. the staff provided an update on its assessments of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, characterized the financial vulnerabilities of the u.s. financial system as notable. the staff judged that asset valuation pressures were elevated. in particular, the forward priceto-earnings ratio for the s&p 500 index stood at the upper end of its historical distribution; high-yield corporate bond spreads tightened further and were near the low end of their historical range; and house prices continued to increase rapidly, leaving valuation measures stretched. that said, the staff did not see signs of loose mortgage underwriting standards or excessive credit growth that could potentially amplify a shock arising from falling house prices. the staff assessed vulnerabilities associated with nonfinancial leverage as lower than in january but still notable. for households, the mortgage debt-toincome ratio was moderate, and mortgage borrowing was concentrated among prime borrowers, though some uncertainty remained regarding the outlook for mortgages in non-payment status. while measures of corporate-sector leverage fell since january, particularly at the most levered firms, the debt of firms that had relatively low earnings-to-interest payment ratios remained high. the staff judged that vulnerabilities arising from financial leverage were moderate. the aggregate common equity tier 1 capital ratio of the largest banks significantly exceeded regulatory requirements. however, some available measures of hedge fund leverage were elevated, and significant data gaps continued to obscure risks at hedge funds and other nonbank financial institutions. vulnerabilities associated with funding risks were characterized as moderate. domestic banks held significant quantities of high-quality liquid assets and had only limited reliance on short-term wholesale funding. nonetheless, significant structural vulnerabilities remained at entities such as prime money funds, and new financial arrangements such as stablecoins appeared to have the same structural maturity and liquidity transformation vulnerabilities but with less transparency and an underdeveloped regulatory framework. staff economic outlook the projection for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the july fomc meeting was little changed, on balance, from the june forecast. in the second half of 2021, an easing of the surge in demand seen over the first part of the year was expected to be largely offset by a reduction in the effects of supply constraints on production, thereby allowing real gdp growth to continue at a rapid pace. for the year as a whole, therefore, real gdp was projected to post a substantial increase, with a correspondingly large decline in the unemployment rate. with the boost to spending growth from continued reductions in social distancing assumed to fade after 2021 and with a further unwinding of the effects of fiscal stimulus, gdp growth was expected to step down in 2022 and 2023. however, with monetary policy assumed to remain highly accommodative, the staff continued to anticipate that real gdp growth would outpace growth in potential output over most of this period, leading to a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels. the staff’s near-term outlook for inflation was revised up further in response to incoming data, but the staff continued to expect that this year’s rise in inflation would prove to be transitory. the 12-month change in total and core pce prices was well above 2 percent in may, and available data suggested that pce price inflation would remain high in june. the staff continued to judge that the surge in demand that had resulted as the economy reopened further had combined with production bottlenecks and supply constraints to boost recent monthly inflation rates. the staff expected the 12-month change in pce prices to move down gradually over the second part of 2021, reflecting an anticipated moderation in monthly inflation rates and the waning of base effects; even so, pce price inflation was projected to be running well above 2 percent at the end of the year. over the following year, the boost to consumer prices caused by supply issues was expected to partly reverse, and import prices were expected to decelerate sharply; as a result, pce price inflation was expected to step down to a little below 2 percent in 2022 before additional increases in resource utilization raised it to 2 percent in 2023. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside and that the uncertainty around the forecast was elevated. in particular, the probability that the course of the pandemic would turn out to be more adverse than the staff’s baseline assumption was viewed to  page 10 federal open market committee be higher than the probability that a more favorable outcome would occur. however, the staff judged that the risks around the inflation projection were now tilted to the upside, as recent data pointed to a greater risk that the upward pressure on inflation that had resulted from supply-related issues would unwind more slowly than the staff’s baseline projection assumed. participants’ views on current economic conditions and the economic outlook in their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that, with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had shown improvement but had not fully recovered. inflation had risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants noted that the path of the economy would continue to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. participants observed that economic activity continued to expand at a rapid pace through the middle of the year even though capacity constraints were restraining the increase in output in some sectors. economic growth was expected to remain strong over the second half of the year, supported by the further reopening of the economy, accommodative financial conditions, and easing of supply constraints. nevertheless, participants generally saw supply disruptions and labor shortages as likely to persist over the second half of the year. in their discussion of the household sector, participants remarked that consumer spending had continued to increase at a very rapid pace, supported by the ongoing reopening of the economy along with the accommodation provided by fiscal policy and monetary policy. in addition, the accumulated stock of savings and further progress on vaccination were cited as important factors lifting household spending. some participants noted that they expected consumer spending to continue to be bolstered by these factors. participants generally expected housing demand to remain strong but noted that construction had been restrained by shortages of materials and other inputs and that home sales had been held back by limited supplies of available homes. with respect to the business sector, participants observed that activity in the service industries most adversely affected by the pandemic, such as in the leisure and hospitality sector, was rebounding as the economy reopened further but had not fully recovered. participants noted that growth in manufacturing activity continued to be solid but was restrained by production bottlenecks and supply constraints, particularly in the motor vehicle sector. citing reports received from contacts in a broad range of industries, participants indicated that shortages of materials and labor as well as supply chain challenges remained widespread and continued to limit the ability of firms to keep up with strong demand. even though their outlook for demand had improved further, many business contacts had expressed uncertainty and pessimism over prospects regarding the easing of supply constraints over the near term. participants commented on the continued improvement in labor market conditions in recent months driven by strong demand for workers. the monthly pace of job gains had picked up, with employment expanding 850,000 in june and with notable increases in the leisure and hospitality sector. nevertheless, the household survey showed that the unemployment rate remained elevated at 5.9 percent in june, and the labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio were little changed in recent months. participants indicated that the economy had not yet achieved the committee’s broad-based and inclusive maximum-employment goal. several participants remarked that the labor market recovery continued to be uneven across demographic and income groups and across sectors. participants generally noted that supply-side factors related to the pandemic— such as caregiving needs, ongoing fears of the virus, increased retirements, and expanded unemployment insurance payments—continued to weigh on labor force participation and employment growth. a majority of participants anticipated that most of these factors would ease in the coming months. they also noted, however, that the spread of the delta variant may temporarily delay the full reopening of the economy and restrain hiring and labor supply. participants observed that recent wage increases had been moderate on average. however, district contacts had continued to report having trouble hiring workers and had indicated that this difficulty was putting upward pressure on wages in some sectors or leading employers to provide additional incentives to attract and retain workers. several participants noted that their district contacts expected that difficulties finding workers would likely extend into the fall.  minutes of the meeting of july 27–28, 2021 page 11 in their discussion of inflation, participants observed that the inflation rate had increased notably and expected that it would likely remain elevated in coming months before moderating. participants remarked that inflation had increased generally more than expected this year and attributed this increase to supply constraints in product and labor markets and a surge in consumer demand as the economy reopened. they noted that many of their district contacts had reported that higher input costs were also putting upward pressure on prices. many participants pointed out that the largest contributors to recent increases in measures of inflation were a handful of sectors most affected by temporary supply bottlenecks or sectors in which price levels were rebounding from depressed levels as the economy continued to reopen. looking ahead, while participants generally expected inflation pressures to ease as the effect of these transitory factors dissipated, several participants remarked that larger-than-anticipated supply chain disruptions and increases in input costs could sustain upward pressure on prices into 2022. in their comments on inflation expectations, some participants noted that measures of longer-term inflation expectations had remained in ranges that were viewed as broadly consistent with the committee’s longer-run inflation goal. several participants indicated that the recent increases in surveybased measures signaled a risk that longer-term inflation expectations might be moving up above levels consistent with the committee’s goals. other participants pointed to the substantial decline in tips-based longer-term inflation compensation since june as suggesting that investors perceived reduced risks that inflation could run persistently above the committee’s 2 percent goal. a couple of participants noted that recent readings on forward inflation compensation could be read as suggesting investor concern that inflation over the longer term could run persistently below the committee’s 2 percent inflation goal. in discussing the uncertainty and risks associated with the economic outlook, many participants remarked that uncertainty was quite high, with slowing in progress on vaccinations and developments surrounding the delta variant posing downside risks to the economic outlook. a number of participants judged that the effects of supply chain disruptions and labor shortages would likely complicate the task of interpreting the incoming data and assessing the speed at which these supply-side factors would dissipate. some participants noted that there were upside risks to inflation associated with concerns that supply disruptions and labor shortages might linger for longer than currently anticipated and might have larger or more persistent effects on prices and wages than they currently assumed. participants who commented on financial stability emphasized the risks associated with elevated valuations across many asset classes. a few participants highlighted scenarios in which a prolonged period of low interest rates and broadly elevated asset valuations could generate imbalances, which could increase financial stability risks. some participants commented on the housing market and noted that ongoing rapid house price increases reflected both demand and supply factors. several participants noted that the lack of evidence of deteriorating mortgage underwriting standards could mitigate risks associated with high housing valuations; a couple of other participants, however, expressed concern that a home price reversal could pose risks to financial stability. some participants cited various potential risks to financial stability including the risks associated with expanded use of cryptocurrencies or the risks associated with collateral liquidity at central counterparties during episodes of market stress. in connection with the former set of risks, a few of these participants highlighted the fragility and the general lack of transparency associated with stablecoins, the importance of monitoring them closely, and the need to develop an appropriate regulatory framework to address any risks to financial stability associated with such products. in their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the federal reserve’s commitment to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. participants judged that the current stance of monetary policy remained appropriate to promote maximum employment as well as to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent. participants also reiterated that the existing outcome-based guidance implied that the paths of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet would depend on actual progress toward reaching the committee’s maximum-employment and inflation goals. participants discussed the progress toward the committee’s goals since december 2020, when the committee adopted its guidance for asset purchases. they generally judged that the committee’s standard of “substantial further progress” toward the maximum-employment and inflation goals had not yet been met, particularly with respect to labor market conditions, and that risks to  page 12 federal open market committee the economic outlook remained. most participants anticipated that the economy would continue to make progress toward those goals and, provided that the economy evolved broadly as they anticipated, they judged that the standard set out in the committee’s guidance regarding asset purchases could be reached this year. with regard to the labor market, participants noted that the demand for workers had been strong in recent months, while the level of employment had been constrained by labor supply shortages and hiring difficulties. several participants emphasized that employment remained well below its pre-pandemic level and that a robust labor market, supported by a continuation of accommodative monetary policy, would allow further progress toward the committee’s broad and inclusive maximum-employment goal and a return over time to labor market conditions as strong as those prevailing before the pandemic. a few other participants judged that monetary policy had limited ability to address the labor supply shortages and hiring difficulties currently constraining the level of employment. several participants also commented that the pandemic might have caused longer-lasting changes in the labor market and that the pre-pandemic labor market conditions may not be the right benchmark against which the committee should assess the progress toward its maximum-employment objective. with regard to inflation, participants commented that recent inflation readings had been boosted by the effects of supply bottlenecks and labor shortages and were likely to be transitory. a few participants noted that, while the specific results depended on the period used in the calculation, some measures of average inflation were already moving above, or would soon move above, the committee’s 2 percent goal, supported by strong demand, a tight labor market, and firming inflation expectations. some other participants emphasized that recent high inflation readings had largely been driven by price increases in a handful of categories. these participants pointed out that there was no evidence of broad-based price pressures or of inappropriately high longer-term inflation expectations. several participants also commented that price increases concentrated in a small number of categories were unlikely to change underlying inflation dynamics sufficiently to overcome the possibility of a persistent downward bias in inflation, as might be associated with the effective lower bound on the policy rate. many participants remarked upon risk-management considerations when contemplating how and when to make changes to the committee’s pace of asset purchases. some participants suggested that it would be prudent for the committee to prepare for starting to reduce its pace of asset purchases relatively soon, in light of the risk that the recent high inflation readings could prove to be more persistent than they had anticipated and because an earlier start to reducing asset purchases would most likely enable additions to securities holdings to be concluded before the committee judged it appropriate to raise the federal funds rate. a few participants expressed concerns that maintaining highly accommodative financial conditions might contribute to a further buildup in risk to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the committee’s dual-mandate goals. in contrast, a few other participants suggested that preparations for reducing the pace of asset purchases should encompass the possibility that the reductions might not occur for some time and highlighted the risks that rising covid-19 cases associated with the spread of the delta variant could cause delays in returning to work and school and so damp the economic recovery. several participants also remained concerned about the mediumterm outlook for inflation and the possibility of the reemergence of significant downward pressure on inflation, especially in light of the recent decline in longerterm inflation compensation. in addition, several participants emphasized that there was considerable uncertainty about the likely resolution of the labor market shortages and supply bottlenecks and about the influence of pandemic-related developments on longer-run labor market and inflation dynamics. those participants stressed that the committee should be patient in assessing progress toward its goals and in announcing changes to its plans on asset purchases. some participants emphasized that a decision to reduce the committee’s pace of asset purchases once the “substantial further progress” benchmark had been achieved would be fully consistent with the committee’s new monetary policy framework and would help foster the achievement of the committee’s longer-run objectives over time. a couple of participants also noted that a tapering of asset purchases did not amount to a tightening of the stance of monetary policy and instead only implied that additional monetary accommodation would be provided at a slower rate. several participants emphasized that an announcement of a reduction in the committee’s pace of asset purchases should not be interpreted as the beginning of a predetermined course for raising the federal funds rate from its current level. those participants stressed that the committee’s assessment regarding the appropriate timing of an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate was separate from its current deliberations on asset purchases and  minutes of the meeting of july 27–28, 2021 page 13 would be subject to the higher standard, as laid out in the committee’s outcome-based guidance on the federal funds rate. nonetheless, a couple of participants cautioned that it could be challenging for the public to disentangle deliberations about the two tools and that any decisions the committee made on its asset purchases would likely influence the public’s understanding of the committee’s other policy intentions, including with regard to future decisions concerning the target range for the federal funds rate. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. they noted that the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had shown improvement but had not fully recovered. inflation had risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members also acknowledged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. all members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run and with inflation having run persistently below this longerrun goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. members expected to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until those outcomes were achieved. all members agreed to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and was on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. last december, the committee indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and agency mortgagebacked securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress had been made toward its maximum-employment and price-stability goals. the members commented that, since then, the economy had made progress toward these goals, and they agreed to continue to assess progress in coming meetings. they judged that these asset purchases would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. members agreed that the postmeeting statement should acknowledge the economy’s continued recovery as well as its progress toward the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals set forth in the committee’s asset purchase guidance in december. in light of these developments, members decided to remove the characterization of sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic as being in a “weak” condition and to replace it with the judgment that those sectors “have not fully recovered.” they also agreed to remove the word “significantly” when characterizing the dependence of the path of the economy on the course of the virus. in addition, members agreed to insert the assessment that “the economy has made progress” toward the committee’s longer-run goals since the guidance on asset purchases was first issued in december and to indicate that the assessment of progress would continue in coming meetings. members agreed that the addition of this language was appropriate to acknowledge the committee’s ongoing deliberations in assessing the economy’s progress toward the committee’s goals and the implications for the pace of asset purchases. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.:  page 14 federal open market committee “effective july 29, 2021, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. • increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) by $40 billion per month. • increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. • conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $80 billion per day; the percounterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have shown improvement but have not fully recovered. inflation has risen, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remain. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation having run persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. the committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. last december, the committee indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward its maximum employment and price stability goals. since then, the economy has made progress toward these goals, and the committee will continue to assess progress in coming meetings. these asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor  minutes of the meeting of july 27–28, 2021 page 15 the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, thomas i. barkin, raphael w. bostic, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, mary c. daly, charles l. evans, randal k. quarles, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the as announced on june 2, 2021, the board approved a final rule, effective july 29, amending regulation d to eliminate references to an interest on required reserves (iorr) rate and to an interest on excess reserves (ioer) rate and replace them with a single interest on reserve balances (iorb) rate. therefore, the board voted on one rate, the iorb rate, at this meet5 board voted unanimously to establish the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective july 29, 2021. 5 the board also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective july 29, 2021. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, september 21– 22, 2021. the meeting adjourned at 10:35 a.m. on july 28, 2021. notation vote by notation vote completed on july 6, 2021, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on june 15–16, 2021.  james a. clouse secretary ing and will continue to do so going forward. the federal register notice, “regulation d: reserve requirements of depository institutions,” is available at www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/06/04/2021-11758/regulation-dreserve-requirements-of-depository-institutions 
nce september 22, 2021 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. today, the federal open market committee kept interest rates near zero and maintained our current pace of asset purchases. these measures, along with our strong guidance on interest rates and on our balance sheet, will ensure that monetary policy will continue to support the economy until the recovery is complete. progress on vaccinations and unprecedented fiscal policy actions are also providing strong support to the recovery. indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. real gdp rose at a robust 6.4 percent pace in the first half of the year, and growth is widely expected to continue at a strong pace in the second half. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months, but the rise in covid-19 cases has slowed their recovery. household spending rose at an especially rapid pace over the first half of the year but flattened out in july and august as spending softened in covid-sensitive sectors, such as travel and restaurants. additionally, in some industries, near-term supply constraints are restraining activity. these constraints are particularly acute in the motor vehicle industry, where the worldwide shortage of semiconductors has sharply curtailed production. partly reflecting the effects of the virus and supply constraints, forecasts from fomc participants for economic growth this year have been revised somewhat lower since our june summary of economic projections, but participants still foresee rapid growth.  as with overall economic activity, conditions in the labor market have continued to improve. demand for labor is very strong, and job gains averaged 750,000 per month over the past three months. in august, however, job gains slowed markedly, with the slowdown concentrated in sectors most sensitive to the pandemic, including leisure and hospitality. the unemployment rate was 5.2 percent in august, and this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market has not moved up from the low rates that have prevailed for most of the past year. factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs and ongoing fears of the virus, appear to be weighing on employment growth. these factors should diminish with progress on containing the virus, leading to more rapid gains in employment. looking ahead, fomc participants project the labor market to continue to improve, with the median projection for the unemployment rate standing at 4.8 percent at the end of this year and 3.5 percent in 2023 and ’24. the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. in particular, despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on lower-wage workers in the service sector and on african americans and hispanics. inflation is elevated and will likely remain so in coming months before moderating. as the economy continues to reopen and spending rebounds, we are seeing upward pressure on prices, particularly because supply bottlenecks in some sectors have limited how quickly production can respond in the near term. these bottleneck effects have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, leading to upward revisions to participants’ inflation projections for this year. while these supply effects are prominent for now, they will abate, and as they do, inflation  is expected to drop back toward our longer-run goal. the median inflation projection from fomc participants falls from 4.2 percent this year to 2.2 percent next year. the process of reopening the economy is unprecedented, as was the shutdown at the onset of the pandemic. as the reopening continues, bottlenecks, hiring difficulties, and other constraints could again prove to be greater and longer lasting than anticipated, posing upside risks to inflation. our framework for monetary policy emphasizes the importance of having well-anchored inflation expectations, both to foster price stability and to enhance our ability to promote our broad-based and inclusive maximum-employment goal. indicators of longer-term inflation expectations appear broadly consistent with our longer-run inflation goal of 2 percent. if sustained higher inflation were to become a serious concern, we would certainly respond and use our tools to assure that inflation runs at levels that are consistent with our goal. the path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus, and risks to the economic outlook remain. the delta variant has led to significant increases in covid-19 cases, resulting in significant hardship and loss and slowing the economic recovery. continued progress on vaccinations would help contain the virus and support a return to more normal economic conditions. the fed’s policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. our asset purchases have been a critical tool. they helped preserve financial stability and market functioning early in the pandemic and since then have helped foster accommodative financial conditions to support the economy. at our meeting that concluded earlier today, the committee continued to discuss the progress made toward our goals since the committee adopted its asset purchase guidance last  december. since then, the economy has made progress toward these goals. if progress continues broadly as expected, the committee judges that a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. we also discussed the appropriate pace of tapering asset purchases once economic conditions satisfy the criterion laid out in the committee’s guidance. while no decisions were made, participants generally view that, so long as the recovery remains on track, a gradual tapering process that concludes around the middle of next year is likely to be appropriate. even after our balance sheet stops expanding, our elevated holdings of longer-term securities will continue to support accommodative financial conditions. the timing and pace of the coming reduction in asset purchases will not be intended to carry a direct signal regarding the timing of interest rate liftoff, for which we have articulated a different and substantially more stringent test. we continue to expect that it will be appropriate to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. half of fomc participants forecast that these favorable economic conditions will be fulfilled by the end of next year; as a result, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate lies slightly above the effective lower bound in 2022. participants generally expect a gradual pace of policy firming that would leave the level of the federal funds rate below estimates of its longer-run level through 2024. of course, these projections do not represent a committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. more important than any forecast is the  fact that policy will remain accommodative until we have achieved our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to support the economy for as long as it takes to complete the recovery. thank you, and i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go first to rachel siegel. rachel siegel. thank you, michelle. and thank you, chair powell, for taking our questions. when it comes to the taper and, eventually, to any rate increases, i’m wondering if you can walk us through what “substantial further progress” looks like, given the latest batch of projections that have pce inflation coming in a little higher than the june projection, the unemployment rate also being higher than june, as well as the change to gdp lower than june. if you could help us make sense of all those things as you sort through what “substantial further progress” looks like, that would be great. chair powell. sure. so the test for beginning our taper is that we’ve achieved substantial further progress toward our goals of [2 percent] inflation and maximum employment. and for inflation, we appear to have achieved more than significant progress—substantial further progress. so that part of the test is achieved, in my view and in the view of many others. so the question is really on the maximum-employment test. so if you look at a good number of indicators, you will see that, since last december, when we articulated the test, and the readings today, in many cases more than half of the distance, for example, between the unemployment rate in december of 2020 and typical estimates of the natural rate—50 or 60 percent of that road has been traveled. so that could be substantial further progress.  many on the committee feel that the “substantial further progress” test for employment has been met. others feel that it’s close, but they want to see a little more progress. there’s a range of perspectives. i guess my own view would be that the test—the “substantial further progress” test for employment is all but met. and so, once we’ve met those two tests, once the committee decides that they’ve met [them]—and that could come as soon as the next meeting; that’s the purpose of that language, is to put notice out that that could come as soon as the next meeting. the committee will consider that test, and we’ll also look at the broader environment at that time and make a decision whether to taper. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to howard schneider. howard schneider. thanks, chair powell. thanks, michelle. so, looking at the seps, we got now basically four years of inflation above target, and policy never gets to the long-run rate. i’m wondering if you could address that from two perspectives: one, within the new framework that the fed adopted last year and, second, from the perspective of the average household that’s now being asked to pay higher prices and increasingly higher prices for four years running when, for some this year, real wages have actually gone down. chair powell. sure. so, as you can see, the inflation forecasts have moved up a bit in the outyears. and that’s really, i think, a reflection of—and they’ve moved up significantly for this year. and that’s, i think, a reflection of the fact that the bottlenecks and shortages that are being—that we’re seeing in the economy have really not begun to abate in a meaningful way yet. so those seem to be going to be with us at least for a few more months and perhaps into next year. so that suggests that inflation’s going to be higher this year, and a number—i guess the inflation rates for next year and 2023 were also marked up, but just by a couple of tenths. why—those are very modest overshoots. you’re looking at 2.2 and 2.1, you know, two years  and three years out. these are very, very—i don’t think that households are going to, you know, notice a couple of tenths of an overshoot. that just happens to be people’s forecasts. you know, we want to foster a strong labor market, and we want to foster inflation averaging 2 percent over time, and i think we’re very much on track to achieve those things. in terms of the framework, i see this as very consistent with the framework. we want inflation expectations to be anchored at around 2 percent. we want, we’re—that’s really the ultimate test of whether we’re getting this done under the framework. and, you know, we do want inflation to run moderately above 2 percent. i wouldn’t put too much on a couple of tenths over 2 percent in 2023 and ’24—one-tenth in ’24. but you’re right, those are the numbers. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to colby smith. colby smith. chair powell—thank you, michelle. chair powell, you mentioned ongoing discussions about the tapering timeline, and i’m wondering what the contours of that debate have been. for those that want to move a bit more quickly, is it about maintaining optionality for a 2022 interest rate increase? or is it about financial stability risks? or concerns about the efficacy of asset purchases at a time when we have supply constraints? thank you. chair powell. so let me say that there’s very broad support on the committee for this plan, both as to the timing and as to the pace of the taper. so this was a unanimous vote today, and i’d say quite broad support for this approach. you’re correct that there are some who would prefer to have gone sooner, and they’ve made their arguments publicly. for some of them, it’s a financial stability concern. and for others, it’s other concerns. they can make their own arguments. this is an approach that the committee will broadly support, and it will put us having completed our taper sometime around the middle of next year, which seems appropriate.  you know, the asset purchases, as i mentioned, were very, very important at the—in the early stages of the crisis. they were essential in restoring market function in the treasury and other markets. then, as the recovery got going, they supported aggregate demand, as they will do. and now we’re in a situation where they still have a use, but it’s time for us to begin to taper them. their usefulness is much less as a tool than it was at the very beginning. and, of course, this leaves the whole question of rate increases ahead, which is really where the framework—the framework is all about how we deal with rate increases and that sort of thing. so we think this is the appropriate way to go. and, again, broad support on the committee. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to nick timiraos. nick timiraos. hi, nick timiraos of the wall street journal. chair powell, you have said the test for liftoff is more stringent than the test for tapering. but if the near-term projections today are credible, more of your colleagues seem to think that rate liftoff, and not just a taper, may be closer at hand. does the committee have a different opinion than you do about the threshold for liftoff that you’ve articulated? or do they believe that either inflation or economic growth will necessitate a rate increase sooner than you do? chair powell. well, so, again, substantial further progress toward our goals is the test for beginning the taper. and the taper takes some months in everyone’s figuring. so you’re going to be well away from satisfying the liftoff test when we begin the taper. so in terms of the liftoff test, though, you know, it’s what we adopted last september. it’s labor market conditions consistent with maximum employment. and while we have interesting signs that, in many ways, the labor market’s very tight, we also have lots of slack in the labor market, and we think that those imbalances will sort themself out. inflation at 2 percent and on track to achieve it,  moderately higher inflation over 2 percent—you know, that really depends on the path of inflation. if inflation remains higher during the course of 2022, then we may already have met that test by the time we reach liftoff. so i just think, if you look at what people are writing down for year-end 2022 numbers, some people are writing down very low unemployment rates. and that’s only one indicator, but it suggests a very strong labor market. and i think they’re writing down in good faith what they see as meeting the test. there’s a range of perspectives about where the economy will be, but— by the way, all but one participants have us lifting off during 2023. so it’s not really an unusually wide array of views about this. nick timiraos. thank you. michelle smith. we’ll go to jeanna smialek. jeanna smialek. hey, chair powell—thank you for taking our questions. prior to recent media reports, were you aware of the kind of security buying and selling that presidents kaplan and rosengren were participating in last year? and i wonder if you thought those were appropriate. chair powell. so, no, i was not aware of the specifics of what they were doing. so let me just say a couple things about this subject. we understand very well that the trust of the american people is essential for us to effectively carry out our mission. and that’s why i directed the fed to begin a comprehensive review of the ethics rules around permissible financial holdings and activity by fed officials. so those rules are, in many respects, the same as those for government agencies, plus a number of things that apply specifically to us because of our business.  one of those is—sort of, three things i would point to in terms of specific restrictures. one is, ownership of certain assets is not allowed, and that’s bank securities and other things. secondly, there are times when we’re not allowed to trade at all or to, you know, buy and sell financial assets. and that’s the period immediately before and during an fomc meeting. and, third, there’s regular disclosure. so all of these—everyone’s, you know, ownership and activities are all disclosed on an annual basis. so, you know, i would have had to go back and read people’s financial disclosures to know what their activities have been. this has been our framework for a long time, and i guess you’d say it’s served us well. the other thing you would say—that it is now clearly seen as not adequate to the task of really sustaining the public’s trust in us. we need to make changes, and we’re going to do that as a consequence of this. this will be a thoroughgoing and comprehensive review. we’re going to gather all the facts and look at ways to further tighten our rules and standards. michelle smith. great. thank you. we’ll go to steve liesman. steve liesman. thank you. thank you, mr. chairman. i want to follow up on jeanna’s question, the issue of ownership of these stocks and trades. do you think it’s appropriate for federal reserve officials to be owning the same assets that the federal reserve is buying? is that one of the modifications that you’re looking at? and in that these—you said yourself, they’re clearly not seen as appropriate. in that the fed’s code of conduct says fed officials should avoid even the appearance of the, of conflict, do those trades, in fact—and holdings—violate the fed’s code of conduct? finally, do you have a timeline as to when you might get—be done with your review? thank you, sir.  chair powell. don’t have a timeline yet; we can start with that. so, well, let me address the muni question, since that’s in there. you know, i personally owned municipal securities for many, many years, and in 2019, i froze that. meaning i—they’re no—i’m holding all those securities, my wife and i, to maturity. and munis were always thought to be a pretty safe place for a fed person to invest because, as you know, the lore was that the fed would never buy municipal securities. so it was not an uncommon thing. and so then comes the, you know, the covid crisis, and i reversed that policy, and i did it without hesitating. and the reason was that the financial markets, including the municipal financial market, were very much on the verge of collapse. and it was time to go, and we did. but we also checked with the office of government ethics and—who looked carefully at it and said that i didn’t have a conflict. so that’s one answer that i wanted to share with you. secondly, you’re right, though, as—we’re going to be looking at all those things. i don’t want to get ahead of the process here and speculate about particular outcomes. but this, again, comprehensive and deliberate process—we’re going to make changes. i want to be able to look back on this years from now and know that we rose to meet this challenge and handled the situation well, and that what we did made a lot of sense and protected the public’s interest and the institution that we’re all a part of. steve liesman. i’m sorry, chair powell—i just want to follow up. you said i was right. when you said “right,” about that the feds should not own—federal reserve officials should not own the same assets they’re buying? is that— chair powell. i think that’s a reasonable thing. yeah, and, of course, for the most part, we don’t. i mean, it was a real coincidence; i happened to pre-own these munis. they were bought many years ago, actually. and so we started buying munis as part of the municipal  liquidity facility. so it was really not a—it just was an unforeseen event. and i couldn’t sell them, so what i did was, i just held them, checked with the ethics people, and went ahead. so, but as a general principle, yeah, that makes a lot of sense. steve liesman. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to chris rugaber. chris rugaber. thank you. thank you. thank you, chair powell. wider question about jobs and the fed’s schedule—the fed’s policy framework that you laid out here. you and other fed officials have often talked about expecting a job market pickup in september as more children return to school, freeing up more parents to work, covid abating. you mentioned in the past the extra unemployment benefits expiring. there’s some real-time data suggesting that we may not be seeing much of a return of labor supply. so do you still expect to see that in the next couple of jobs reports? and how would a relatively weak jobs report in september affect your plans? thank you. chair powell. so, you’re right, we have a—really, i’ll call it a unique situation where, by many measures, the labor market is tight. and 11 million job openings, very widespread reports from employers all over the economy saying it’s quite difficult to hire people, wages moving up, and that kind—so, quite a tight labor market. so our view, i think— widespread view a few months ago was that several things were coming together in the fall, including kids back to school, which would, you know, which would lighten caregiving duties, including the expiration of unemployment—extra unemployment benefits, and other things would come together to provide an increase in labor supply, and so we’d get out of this strange world where there’re lots of unemployed people and a high unemployment rate but a labor shortage.  and so what happened was, delta happened. and you had this very sharp spike in delta cases. and i think, so that affects—for example, when schools are open 60 percent of the time or when they’re always at a threat of being closed because of delta, the delta variant, you know, you might want to wait. rather than going ahead and taking a job and starting work only to have to quit it three weeks later, you’re going to wait until you’re confident of that. so some of that may not have happened. also, people didn’t, you know—as you know, hiring and spending in these face-to-face service industries, travel and leisure, it just kind of stopped during those months. so we—so that—really, the big shortfall in labor, in jobs, was largely in travel and leisure, and that’s because of—clearly because of delta. so that all happened. and so what we—we know things that didn’t happen. i think there’s still—it may just be that it’s going to take more time. but it still seems that, inexorably, people will—these are people who were largely working back in february of 2020. they’ll get back to work when it’s time to do that. it just may take a longer time. you’re right, though—it didn’t happen with any force in september, and a lot of that was delta. in terms of the—you asked also about the test for november. i think if the economy continues to progress broadly in line with expectations, then i think—and also the overall situation is appropriate for this, then i think we could easily move ahead at the next meeting. or not, depending on whether we feel like that, those tests are met. chris rugaber. well, just a quick—if i could just quickly follow up, i mean, what, how much of that will depend on what kind of jobs report we get for september? and, i mean, is it, you know, are you in a data-dependent phase here where you need to see certain numbers going ahead? or are we at a point where you’ve accumulated enough progress that—  chair powell. so it is, it’s accumulated progress. so, you know, for me, it wouldn’t take a knockout, great, super strong employment report. it would take a reasonably good employment report for me to feel like that test is met. and others on the committee—many on the committee feel that the test is already met. others want to see more progress. and, you know, we’ll work it out as we go. but i would say that, in my own thinking, the test is all but met. so i don’t personally need to see a very strong employment report, but i’d like to see a good—a decent employment report. i mean, it’s not, it’s, again, it’s not to be confused with the test for liftoff, which is so much higher. chris rugaber. great. thank you. michelle smith. okay. thank you. we’ll go to victoria guida. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. so i wanted to ask about the vice chair of supervision position and just—i was wondering if you could speak about how you view that role and the extent to which you defer to that person on regulatory policy. and then, just sort of a related question: as you know, randy quarles’s vice chairmanship ends next month, and i was wondering if he’s going to retain the supervisory portfolio until he’s replaced in that role. chair powell. sure. so dodd-frank created this position, vice chair for supervision, and it’s, there’s actually a specific assignment in the dodd-frank language, as i’m sure you know. and, effectively, what it means is that the vice chair for supervision is charged with setting the regulatory agenda. and, you know, it’s a specific grant of authority. and in the 10 years, almost, that i’ve been at the fed, that person has really done that. dan tarullo certainly did it, and vice chair quarles did it as well. and i would, i think—i respect that authority. i respect that that’s the person who will set the regulatory agenda going forward, and i would accept that.  and, furthermore, you know, it’s fully appropriate to look at—for a new person to come in and look at the current state of regulation and supervision and suggest appropriate changes, and i welcome that. in terms of vice chair quarles’s term, we’re not currently in that situation, and i actually don’t have any updates for you on that today. we’ll keep you posted on that. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to steve matthews at bloomberg. steve matthews. thank you. chair powell, i wanted to ask about the inclusive monetary policy framework. in particular, bloomberg surveyed economists, and we found that they predict liftoff will happen when the u.s. unemployment rate is 3.8 percent but the black unemployment rate is 6.1 percent. and i’m wondering if a 6.1 percent unemployment rate for african americans is consistent with full employment or whether it would need to be lower as part of your inclusive growth strategy. chair powell. right, so the point of the broad and inclusive goal was not to target a particular unemployment rate for any particular group. really, we look at a broad range of—a very broad range of metrics when we think about what maximum employment is. and one of the things we look at is unemployment rates and participation rates and wages for different demographic and age groups and that kind of thing. so we will do all of that. so i think if you look back, what were we really thinking? so we all saw the benefits of a strong labor market. if you look at the last two or three years of, before the pandemic hit, you saw—after a lot of long progress, you saw a really strong labor market. and you saw wages at the low end moving up faster than everywhere else—something that’s great to see. we also saw the lowest unemployment rates for minorities of various, you know, for african americans, for example, and also participation rates. we saw a really, really healthy set of dynamics. and, by the way, we also—there was no reason why it couldn’t continue. there  were no imbalances in the economy, and then along came the pandemic. we were not—there was nothing in the economy that looked like a buildup of imbalances that could cause a recession. so i was very much thinking that the country would really benefit from a few more years of this. it would have been—so we’re all quite eager to get back to that. we also said we wouldn’t raise rates just in response to very low unemployment, in the absence of inflation. so that was another aspect of it, because we saw that that really benefited labor market participants in a broad and inclusive way. that’s, of course, not the current situation. we have significant slack in the economy and inflation well above target, not moderately above target. so that’s, really, how we think about it. it isn’t really just targeting the headline numbers, but it’s about taking all of those things into account in your thinking about what constitutes maximum employment. steve matthews. just to follow up, should there be a significant gap between black unemployment and overall unemployment for structural reasons that are outside of the control of the fed that other people should be doing something about? or should that be— should the gap be narrowed, if not down to zero? chair powell. well, you really—i mean, first of all, ideally, there wouldn’t be any gap, of course. we would all love to see no such gap. this is a persistent gap, and it’s very hard to explain based on typical metrics. it’s just, it’s quite troubling, but it really is—you know, we have, you know, famously broad and blunt tools. i think eliminating inequality and racial discrimination and racial disparities and that kind of thing is really something that fiscal policy and other policies—frankly, education policies and that kind of thing—are better at focusing on. i think we’ve identified the part that we can do, and we’ll do that part. but i’ve always been clear that it’s going to take policies broadly across society to work on these problems.  steve matthews. thanks. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to michael mckee. michael mckee. —a plan for dealing with a debt default that included prioritization, that included changes in bank regulations and possibly selling defaulted—or, nondefaulted treasuries and buying those who are—that are. are any or all of those still on the table? do you think any of those would work? and what would happen to the economy, in your view, should the debt ceiling not be raised? chair powell. so, i missed the first few words, but i think i got your question. so it’s just very important that the debt ceiling be raised in a timely fashion so that the united states can pay its bills when and as they come due. that’s a critically important thing. the failure to do that is something that could result in severe reactions, severe damage to the economy and to the financial markets. and it’s just not something that we could contemplate, that we should contemplate. i’m not going to comment on particular tactics or things like that. i’m just going to say that i think we can all agree that the united states shouldn’t default on any of its obligations—should pay them when and as due. and that, you know, no one should assume that the fed or anyone else can protect the markets or the economy in the event of a failure—fully protect in the event of a failure to, you know, to make sure that we do pay those debts when they’re due. michael mckee. good. if i could follow up, have you discussed options with members of congress? chair powell. you know, i don’t generally ever talk about the conversations i have with elected officials or other appointed officials. but, look, you can see that this is a major focus among those who have responsibility for it, and—including elected people.  michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to hannah lang. hannah lang. hi—thanks so much. senator warren sent you a letter last week urging the fed to break up wells fargo, citing what she called “ungovernable behavior” from the bank. i’m just curious, under what circumstances would the fed actually consider revoking a financial holding company’s license? and if the indiscretions at wells fargo, in your opinion, warrant such an action? chair powell. so we’re, of course, very closely monitoring wells fargo’s efforts to fix its widespread and pervasive problems. they represent a serious matter to us, and the firm is required to remediate them. and we will take appropriate supervisory action if the firm fails to meet our expectation. we continue to hold the firm accountable for its deficiencies with an unprecedented asset cap that will stay in place until the firm has comprehensively fixed its problems. and we’re not going to remove that asset cap until that’s done. so bottom line is, we’ll take strong supervisory action if a firm is engaging in unsafe and unsound practices or violating laws. but i can’t speak to our confidential supervisory assessments of any individual bank. michelle smith. thank you. now we’ll go to michael derby. michael derby. thank you for taking my question. you noted earlier in the press conference that you weren’t aware of the trading activity of the boston and dallas fed bank presidents. as you know, those, all 12 regional fed bank presidents just went through the renomination process earlier this year. and governor brainard described it as a rigorous process at the time. so i want to know, did anybody know—did anybody at the board level know about the stock trading activity? and, going forward, do you still have confidence in the dallas and boston fed bank presidents to do their job?  chair powell. so these, i don’t need to tell you, we file, people file these reports annually. and i think they were just quite recently filed for 2020. so i don’t have any reason to think people at the board would have known about particular trading that’s going on. they will see that—there are people at the fed who see the, you know, see the trading reports when they’re, you know, when they’re annually filed. you know, in terms of having confidence and that sort of thing, i think no one is happy, no one on the fomc is happy to be in this situation, to be having these questions raised. it’s something we take very, very seriously. this is an important moment for the fed, and i’m determined that we will rise to the moment and handle it in ways that will stand up over time. i’m very reluctant to get ahead of the process and speculate, though, about different things. and, you know, when we have things to announce, we’ll go ahead and do that, but that’s really what i have for today. michael derby. one small follow-up. i mean, i know that you didn’t have the 2020 forms in hand, but you would have had past-year forms in hand. and at least in the case of, like, the dallas disclosure forms, similar trading activity was shown in years past. so that, in theory, could have been something that came up in the renomination process. chair powell. so that’s, yeah, that’s a good question. so, you know, the five-year review that we do under this unusual provision of law where all of the reserve bank presidents are reviewed for reappointment at the same time every five years, that is really a broad review about their leadership of the institution, their performance on the fomc, all of those things. and if there were a concern—a public concern or a private concern—about something that someone had done, we wouldn’t wait for the five-year. we wouldn’t wait that day if there were concerns.  you’re right, though, these—as i mentioned, we have had a framework for a long time, and it’s similar to what other government agencies have, only it’s a little stricter. and it is that you can trade financial instruments, but not specific ones like bank debt. you can’t trade during the fomc period and during the meeting—the blackout period and then during the meeting. and then you disclose all this, and we have disclosed it for years. so all of these things have been going—to the extent they’ve been going on, they’ve been a matter of public record. and, you know—but, nonetheless—so that—you know, it was seeming to work just okay. and now you look at it, and you see this, and you think, “we need to do better.” and we will. but you’re right, but it has not been part of the process. and, appropriately, i don’t think it should have been. i mean, i wouldn’t blame the people who conduct that review. i really think, if someone had raised concerns or if we’d had concerns, then it would have been, but it wouldn’t have been part of that process. it would have been raised instantly, rather than once every five years. michael derby. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to jean yung. jean yung. thank you, michelle. chair powell, i wanted to ask about how the fed would balance the two parts of its dual mandate if inflation stays elevated but we still have a labor shortage and participation remains lower than ideal. would you hold off on raising rates? or how would you think about that? thank you. chair powell. well, let me say one thing. you’re looking for conditions consistent with maximum employment to lift off, and those conditions can change over time. so you’re not necessarily bound by a particular level of the unemployment rate or the participation rate or anything else like that, which can change over time. but more to your point, really, we actually  have a paragraph in our framework, and something like this has been there for a long time. it’s, i think it’s paragraph six. and you’re talking about a situation in which the two goals are not complementary; they’re somehow in tension. and if we judge that’s effect—that is the case, what it says is, we take into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with the mandate. so, we used to call that the balanced-approach paragraph because it had those words. so it’s a very difficult situation for any central bank to be—pardon me—to be in a situation where the two goals are in tension. and that paragraph tries to address it by saying we would sort of weigh the equities between the two. how long will it take, and how big are the gaps, and that kind of thing. we don’t really think we’re in that—we’re sort of in that situation, i’d say, in a short-term way. but we think, we do expect that this is sort of—because of the covid shock and the reopening and all that, you’re seeing this temporarily. michelle smith. great. thank you. we’ll go to edward lawrence. edward lawrence. thank you, michelle. thank you, mr. chairman, for taking the question. so on corporate debt, what happened with evergrande that we’ve been watching, could that be—is that a preview of what could happen with the amount of corporate debt that’s out there? in the past you’ve said you’re watching the level of corporate debt. so is, what’s your level of concern right now? and would you consider the evergrande group issue sort of a warning signal? chair powell. about the united states, no. corporate defaults are very low in the united states right now. corporate leverage built up over the course of the long expansion that ended with the pandemic. we were very concerned in the last year or so. we were concerned in  the last year or so, and then i’d say very concerned at the beginning of the pandemic that, if you’ve got a highly leveraged company and your revenue stops for an uncertain period, as things happened at the beginning of the crisis, we were very concerned that there would be a wave of defaults. it didn’t happen, potentially—i mean, to a significant extent because of the cares act and the response that we undertook and all that. it was a, you know, a much stronger response than we’ve ever had. and i think for whatever reason now, you have very, very low default rates now among corporate debt. you know, the evergrande situation seems very particular to china, which has very high debt for an emerging market economy, really the highest that any emerging market economy has had. and the government has been working to get that under control. this is part of that effort. the government put new strictures in place for highly leveraged companies. and evergrande is dealing with those strictures, and it’s something they’re managing. in terms of the implications for us, there isn’t, there’s not a lot of direct united states exposure. the big chinese banks are not tremendously exposed. but, you know, you would worry that it would affect global financial conditions through confidence channels and that kind of thing. but i wouldn’t draw a parallel to the united states corporate sector. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to brian cheung. brian cheung. hi, chairman powell. just wondering if you could give us an update on whether or not you’ve had conversations with the white house about a possible reappointment. and then whether or not you would like to be reappointed as this chatter kind of builds up. thanks. chair powell. i think the phrase goes: “i have nothing for you on that today.” sorry. i’m focused on doing my job—  michelle smith. let’s go to greg robb. chair powell. —i’m focused on doing my job every day for the american people, and i don’t have any comment on that, brian. michelle smith. sorry about that. let’s go to greg robb. greg robb. thanks. thanks for taking my question, chair powell. i was wondering if, in your discussion about the tapering that—you said that officials think it’s appropriate to end around the middle of the year—if there was any discussion about what happens to the balance sheet then. i’ve heard some fed officials say that they wouldn’t shrink the balance sheet. was that discussed? and what’s your stance on shrinking the balance sheet? thanks. chair powell. so my thinking on this has been: let’s get through the taper decision, and then let’s turn to those issues. there are a number of related issues that—you mentioned one, greg, but, you know, and—which you need to start to think about, and we’ll do that. but i want to get, we want to get through this taper decision, and then turn to those issues, rather than start, you know, thinking about them now and having the minutes discuss them and get people thinking that we are, you know, focused on those issues, because we’re really not. and, you know, we do have the experience of what we did last time. we’ve watched other countries and what they’ve done. so i think we’ll be able to get to sensible decisions fairly expeditiously when it’s time. but it’s just not time yet, in my thinking. greg robb. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to scott horsley. scott horsley. thank you, mr. chairman. you talked a little bit about inflation expectations. and there does seem to be something of a divide between market expectations and the views of professional economists—which are pretty much in line with the fomc  members—and laypeople’s expectations, at least as reflected in the recent new york fed survey. how much weight do you put on laypeople’s expectations? and what do you think accounts for that divide? chair powell. so within—let’s just take the household surveys generally. the new york fed survey, let me talk about that specifically, and this is from the new york fed. it’s only an eight-year-old survey, and it does seem as though the, they’re looking three years out. and it seems like there’s a high correlation between three-year and one-year. for the most part, surveys are showing that households expect higher inflation in the near term but not in the longer term. and that’s also what expectations are showing. so there are many, many different inflation measures, of course. and that’s why we have this thing called the cie, which is the, it’s an index of—it’s market-based measures, it’s professional forecasters, and it’s household surveys. and you just put them all—it’s not, you know, it doesn’t have a lot of grand theory about it. you put them all in, and you measure the change. so you should be—and, also, you measure things like the dispersion and that sort of thing, so you can look at all that. and, you know, it tells a story of inflation expectations moving up. many of the different measures will also show inflation expectations moving back up to where they were in, say, 2013, which was before the really—the drop in inflation expectations broadly happened in ’14 and ’15—around then. so that’s not a troubling thing. but, you know, inflation expectations are terribly important. we spend a lot of time watching them. and if we did see them moving up in a troubling way and running persistently above levels that are really consistent with our mandate, then, you know, we would certainly react to that. but we don’t really see that now. we see more of a moderate increase that is—the  first part of which is welcome. and because, you know, inflation expectations had drifted down, and it was good to see them get back up a bit. but, again, we watch carefully. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to heather scott. heather scott. hi. sorry, you caught me off guard. thank you, chair powell, for taking my question. i really appreciate it. again, on the taper timing. you say it’s going to last to the middle of next year. but with your concerns about the potential for upside risks to inflation, would you think you might need to have liftoff happen before you finish the tapering? chair powell. that’s not my expectation. of course, we can always—we haven’t decided to taper yet, and we haven’t decided the pace yet. so, you know, it’s not my expectation that we would have to. we can certainly speed up or slow down the taper if we—if it becomes appropriate, though. absolutely. in fact, back in ’13, when we tapered, we always said we weren’t on a preset course. i think this will be a shorter period. the economy’s much farther along than it was when we tapered in 2013. so it makes sense to allow the runoff to happen. it’s a very gradual taper. it will be when we agree on it. and, but we certainly have the freedom to either speed it up or slow it down if that becomes appropriate. heather scott. but you wouldn’t expect rate liftoff to happen until you’re finished with that process? chair powell. you wouldn’t, no, because, you know, when you’re—as long as you’re buying assets, you’re adding accommodation, and it wouldn’t make any sense to, you know, then lift off. i mean, what you would do is, you’d speed up the taper, i think, if that were the situation you’re in. not—we don’t expect to be in that situation, but i do think it would be wiser at that point to go ahead and speed up the taper, just because the two are then working in the same direction.  heather scott. all right, thank you. chair powell. thank you. michelle smith. okay, for the last question, we’ll go to jeff cox. jeff cox. thank you, mr. chairman, for taking the question. i just wanted to check in with you to see if you have an update at all on the efforts from the fed to develop a central bank digital currency. i believe that the report was supposed to come this summer, and indications that it’s going to come this month. but the drumbeat seems to be kind of getting louder to see where the fed’s heading on this, and just wondering if you can provide some update there. chair powell. sure, i’d be glad to. so we think it’s really important that the central bank maintain a stable currency and payment system for the public’s benefit. that’s one of our jobs. we also live in a time of transformational innovation around digital payments, and we need to make sure that the fed is able to continue to deliver to the public a stable and trustworthy currency and payment system. so there’s extensive private innovation, a lot of which is taking place outside the regulatory perimeter. and innovation is fantastic. our economy runs on innovation. but where the public’s money is concerned, we need to make sure that appropriate regulatory protections are in place, and today they really are not in some cases. so with that in mind and with the creation of myriad private currencies and currency-like products, we’re working proactively to evaluate whether to issue a cbdc and, if so, in what form. we have two broad workstreams, one of which is really technology, both at the board and in the federal reserve bank of boston’s work with mit—the other of which is to identify, scope out, deal with, analyze the various public policy issues. as you mentioned, we do intend to publish a discussion paper soon that will be the basis for a period of public engagement— engagement with many different groups, including elected officials, around these issues. we  think it’s our obligation to do the work, both on technology and public policy, to form a basis for making an informed decision. the ultimate test we’ll apply when assessing a central bank digital currency and other digital innovations is: are there clear and tangible benefits that outweigh any costs and risks? we’re also, as you know, investing heavily right now in building a new settlement system for instant payments in the u.s. it’ll be the first such major expansion of our core payment system since the 1970s. we found the case for this quite compelling—for consumers, businesses, and just ensuring that all financial institutions have access to that payment system. so, bottom line, we haven’t made a decision about the cbdc, but we will be issuing a discussion paper soon in order to form the basis of this public interaction that we’ll have. thank you very much. jeff cox. if i could have a quick—could i get a quick follow on that? thank you. i was just wondering if—okay—are you concerned at all with kind of falling behind in the global race for digital currencies? chair powell. i think it’s important that we get to a place where we can make an informed decision about this and do so expeditiously. i don’t think we’re behind. i think it’s more important to do this right than to do it fast. we are the world’s reserve currency. and i think we’re in a good place to make that analysis and make that decision—by the way, which will be a governmentwide decision. we would do this, we would have to have a meeting of the minds with the administration and also probably with congress. we would really like to have broad support for this. it’s a very important innovation. and i think we would need that to go ahead, and that’s the process we’re engaged in. thanks very much. michelle smith. thank you.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. (this footnote was corrected on november 26, 2021, to replace an erroneous reference to a “discussion of asset purchases.”) page 2 federal open market committee  eric c. engstrom, deputy associate director, division of monetary affairs, board; patrick e. mccabe, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board; skander van den heuvel, deputy associate director, division of financial stability, board; jeffrey d. walker,2 deputy associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board brian j. bonis and etienne gagnon, assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board penelope a. beattie,3 section chief, office of the secretary, board; deepa d. datta,4 section chief, division of international finance, board michele cavallo, camelia minoiu, and anna orlik, principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board randall a. williams, lead information manager, division of monetary affairs, board david na, senior financial institution policy analyst, division of monetary affairs, board meredith black, first vice president, federal reserve bank of dallas michael dotsey and joseph w. gruber, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of philadelphia and kansas city, respectively anne baum, carlos garriga, edward s. knotek ii, giovanni olivei, and mark l.j. wright, senior vice presidents, federal reserve banks of new york, st. louis, cleveland, boston, and minneapolis, respectively matthew d. raskin,2 vice president, federal reserve bank of new york andreas l. hornstein, senior advisor, federal reserve bank of richmond alex richter, economic policy advisor and senior economist, federal reserve bank of dallas keshav dogra, senior economist, federal reserve bank of new york developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments over the period. domestic financial conditions were little changed, on net, and remained highly accommodative. the spread of the delta variant of the covid-19 virus weighed on the near-term growth outlook and median respondents to the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers marked down projections for gross domestic product (gdp) growth and revised up projections for inflation this year. nonetheless, expectations for the trajectory of growth beyond 2021 were little changed. implied forward inflation compensation two to four years ahead based on treasury inflation-protected securities (tips) increased modestly over the intermeeting period. regarding the outlook for monetary policy, market participants noted policymaker communications suggesting that tapering of asset purchases could begin this year and end by mid-2022. around half of respondents to the desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants viewed december as the most likely timing of the first reduction in the net pace of purchases, although respondents also attached significant probability to the first reduction coming in november. median expectations for the pace of net purchases were consistent with a gradual tapering of net purchases being completed in july of next year, about one to two months earlier than in the previous surveys. expectations for the target federal funds rate based on survey responses and interest rate futures moved up slightly since the previous meeting. several central banks announced reductions in the pace of their asset purchase programs or eventual plans for their balance sheets once asset purchases had been completed. these announcements were broadly in line with market participants’ expectations and elicited only a modest reaction in financial markets. in latin america and emerging europe, some central banks recently tightened policy to address rising inflation pressures. investors remained focused on other vulnerabilities in emerging markets, and concerns had grown recently about the possible implications of developments in china. the manager turned next to a discussion of money markets and federal reserve operations. domestic funding 3 attended tuesday’s session only. attended the discussion of economic developments and the outlook. 4 minutes of the meeting of september 21–22, 2021 page 3  conditions were stable over the period. the federal funds rate edged lower amid ongoing increases in reserves, but it remained well within the target range; the secured overnight financing rate (sofr) was steady at 5 basis points. participation in the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility increased to an average of just over $1 trillion over the period, driven primarily by increased usage by government money market funds. market participants were attentive over the period to negotiations on the debt limit. yields on treasury bills maturing in mid-october to mid-november had become modestly elevated as investors reduced exposures to securities that could be at risk for delayed payments. market participants noted information in the public domain about measures the federal reserve and the treasury could take around a debt limit event. they pointed, in particular, to the october 2013 fomc meeting minutes, which highlighted that the federal reserve would use normal procedures in its operations, both as the debt limit nears and in the event of a delayed payment. market participants also focused on a 2013 report by the treasury market practices group (tmpg), which outlined a process that could be used to delay principal payments on treasury securities by rolling forward the operational maturity date in order to maintain the ability to transfer such securities over fedwire®. the tmpg report noted that such a procedure would help support ongoing functioning of markets for securities with delayed payments. this would maintain their eligibility in open market operations under normal procedures. nevertheless, market participants emphasized that, even with these procedures, a delayed payment would create severe and broad-based market disruption. in light of increased usage of the on rrp facility and the potential for continued downward pressure on short-term interest rates over the near term, the manager next discussed a staff proposal to increase the percounterparty limit for the on rrp facility to $160 billion. staff analysis suggested that the proposed increase was likely to be sufficient to support effective policy implementation for most foreseeable circumstances. the manager provided a brief update on the new repurchase agreement (repo) facilities that the committee had announced following its meeting in july. the desk had been working to onboard depository institutions as additional counterparties for the standing repo facility. in addition, a number of foreign central banks had expressed intent to establish access to the foreign and international monetary authority repo facility. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the september 21–22 meeting suggested that u.s. real gdp was increasing in the third quarter at a slower pace than in the second quarter of the year. the pace of improvement in labor market conditions had remained very rapid in july but slowed sharply in august. consumer price inflation in june and july—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the personal consumption expenditures (pce) price index—was elevated. total nonfarm payroll employment increased sharply in july but rose much less rapidly in august, with job gains in the leisure and hospitality sector slowing to zero. in addition, state and local government employment was reported to have fallen in august, though abnormal seasonal swings had likely distorted recent readings for this sector. as of august, total payroll employment had retraced three-fourths of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. the unemployment rate had declined from 5.9 percent in june to 5.2 percent in august; although the unemployment rates for african americans and hispanics had also declined, on net, over this period, both rates remained well above the national average. the labor force participation rate edged up, on net, and the employment-to-population (epop) ratio rose further in july and august. private-sector job openings, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, increased further in july and continued to suggest that labor demand was extraordinarily high. initial claims for regular state unemployment insurance remained near the pandemic-period low that had been reached in early september but were still somewhat elevated relative to prepandemic levels. weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by the board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp that were available through early september pointed to a modest pickup in the pace of private employment gains relative to august. average hourly earnings for all employees rose strongly in july and august, with gains that were widespread across industries. recent monthly increases in average hourly earnings appeared to reflect a combination of continued strong labor demand and increased difficulties in hiring. a staff measure of the 12-month change in the median wage derived from the adp data had also pointed to strong wage growth, with a pace in august page 4 federal open market committee  that was well above the growth rates seen before the pandemic. by contrast, the wage growth tracker measure constructed by the federal reserve bank of atlanta had not shown a similar pickup. the employment cost index of hourly compensation in the private sector, which also includes benefit costs, rose at an annual rate of 3.6 percent over the 6 months ending in june, 1 percentage point faster than the 12-month change posted in december 2020. inflation, as measured by either the pce price index or the consumer price index (cpi), had been boosted by a surge in demand as the economy reopened further, along with the effects of production bottlenecks and supply constraints. total pce price inflation was 4.2 percent over the 12 months ending in july, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 3.6 percent over the 12 months ending in july. in contrast, the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 2.0 percent in july. in august, the 12-month change in the cpi was 5.3 percent, while the core cpi rose 4.0 percent over the same period. in the third quarter of 2021, the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, was little changed relative to the second quarter and was near its average over the decade before the pandemic. although real pce declined in july, the components of retail sales used to estimate pce rose strongly in august, returning to levels seen in the spring. however, concerns about the course of the pandemic appeared to be weighing on consumer services spending, as available indicators pointed to a slowing in demand for services sensitive to social distancing. in addition, measures of consumer confidence had moved lower in august. demand for housing appeared to have remained very strong, but incoming data suggested that materials shortages and a lack of developed lots for construction were restraining residential building activity. available indicators suggested that growth in business fixed investment was slowing somewhat in the third quarter as supply bottlenecks—particularly for motor vehicles—weighed on business equipment spending. manufacturing output rose strongly in july and ticked up further in august. in august, activity in the oil and gas sector and production of petrochemicals had been held down by shutdowns related to hurricane ida. supply chain issues faced by a number of other industries also continued to be a drag on overall factory output. total real government purchases appeared to be increasing in the third quarter after having moved lower in the second quarter. available data suggested that federal nondefense purchases were declining sharply in the third quarter but that robust gains in real state and local purchases were offsetting this decline. the u.s. international trade deficit remained high in july. after rising in june, real goods imports fell back in july, held down by a sizable decline in consumer goods imports, but the levels of consumer and total goods imports remained well above pre-covid-19 levels. real goods exports edged up in july and were close to prepandemic levels. bottlenecks in the global semiconductor industry continued to weigh on exports and imports of automotive products, and shipping congestion continued to restrain trade overall. exports and imports of services rose again in july, but they remained low relative to pre-pandemic levels, largely because international travel was still depressed. in the advanced foreign economies (afes), where high vaccination rates had increased resilience to covid-19 outbreaks, incoming data were consistent with economic growth in the third quarter at a slightly faster pace than in the second quarter. with the economic reopening under way, purchasing managers indexes for both manufacturing and services remained strong in europe and canada. conversely, in emerging market economies (emes)—especially in southeast asia, where vaccination rates were lower—a global resurgence in covid19 infections due to the delta variant led to renewals of public health restrictions. these restrictions weakened retail sales and contributed to labor shortages and transportation congestion, disrupting global supply chains. inflation abroad was elevated, reflecting reversals of price declines early in the pandemic, past increases in energy and commodity prices, upward pressures from supply bottlenecks, and past exchange rate depreciations in some emes. staff review of the financial situation financial market prices were little changed over the intermeeting period. concerns over the period about the effects of covid-19 developments on economic performance and, late in the period, about a heavily indebted chinese property developer appeared to have only marginal net effects on financial asset prices. the incoming domestic economic data were generally viewed as mixed. yields on treasury securities of intermediate maturities increased modestly, the market-implied path of the federal funds rate steepened, domestic equity prices were unchanged, and speculative-grade corporate minutes of the meeting of september 21–22, 2021 page 5  bond spreads narrowed modestly. short-term funding markets were stable. market-based financing conditions were robust, and credit availability improved for riskier borrowers. yields on intermediate-maturity treasury securities increased modestly, on net, amid mixed news on economic activity and the pandemic, and slightly less-accommodative-than-expected july fomc communications. measures of inflation compensation declined modestly, on net. the market-implied level of the effective federal funds rate for the ends of 2023 and 2024 rose 12 and 17 basis points, respectively. broad stock market prices were about unchanged, on net, over the intermeeting period. early in the period, concerns over the delta variant were a headwind for stock prices. prices recovered following the fda’s first full approval of a covid-19 vaccine and signs that the delta variant surge was starting to abate. over the intermeeting period, spreads of yields on speculative-grade corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity treasury securities narrowed slightly, on net. investment-grade corporate bond spreads were little changed, on net, and spreads of municipal bond indexes increased slightly but remained well below pre-pandemic levels. on september 20, stock market prices fell notably and speculative-grade yield spreads widened amid rising concerns about the creditworthiness of a chinese property developer, but these moves were mostly reversed during the following day, particularly in the stock market. short-term funding markets were stable over the intermeeting period. the effective federal funds rate declined slightly, from 10 basis points at the beginning of the period to 8 basis points at the end, while the sofr remained at 5 basis points throughout the period. assets under management (aum) of government money market mutual funds increased modestly to near all-time highs. treasury bill supply continued to decline with the reinstatement of the debt ceiling. higher aum together with declining treasury bill supply led government money market mutual funds to increase their participation at the federal reserve’s on rrp facility. participation in on rrp operations increased from an average of $808 billion over the previous intermeeting period to $1.08 trillion. foreign asset prices fluctuated moderately over the intermeeting period as market participants continued to assess the effect of the delta variant on global growth and inflation. concerns about a potential default by a heavily indebted chinese property developer and risks of a downturn in the chinese real estate sector intensified later in the period, but effects on broader financial markets were limited. on balance, major foreign equity indexes were mixed, the broad dollar appreciated a touch, and sovereign yields in most major afes increased moderately. in the euro area and the united kingdom, higher-than-expected inflation data contributed to the rise in yields and inflation compensation measures. in domestic credit markets, large nonfinancial firms had ample access to market-based financing as market participants appeared confident in the domestic corporate credit outlook. after accounting for the seasonal summer lull in activity, gross corporate bond issuance remained solid in july and august. leveraged loan issuance was also strong in july and august. equity funding raised through traditional initial public offerings remained robust over the summer, while equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies remained at the subdued levels seen in recent months. commercial and industrial (c&i) loans declined notably through august, amid ongoing forgiveness of paycheck protection program (ppp) loans. excluding ppp loans, c&i loan balances were estimated to have been largely unchanged between june and july. the credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations remained strong with a positive outlook. the volume of credit rating upgrades for nonfinancial bonds outpaced downgrades noticeably in july and august. trailing default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans remained low, as did market indicators of future default expectations. in the municipal bond market, financing conditions remained accommodative. issuance of municipal debt was strong in july and august and indicators of credit quality of municipal debt remained healthy, though municipal bond impairments—that is, credit events that are less severe than payment defaults—remained elevated in august. these impairments were concentrated in the retirement and assisted living sector and represent a very small fraction of the municipal market. survey-based indicators suggest small business owners, especially from covid-sensitive sectors that include lodging and food services, arts, entertainment and recreation, and educational services, became more pessimistic about their financial prospects, largely because of a worsening of near-term expectations for sales and general business conditions. small business loan originations were above pre-pandemic levels in june and july, page 6 federal open market committee  but increased concerns about the delta variant depressed loan demand in august. financing conditions in commercial real estate (cre) improved over the intermeeting period amid increasing cre property prices. cre loan growth at banks strengthened and issuance of commercial mortgagebacked securities (cmbs) remained robust over the summer. spreads of agency cmbs were generally at or below pre-pandemic levels. strong investor appetite for cmbs was supported by falling delinquency rates on mortgages, although delinquency rates remained elevated for cmbs backed by hotel and retail properties. financing remained limited for the hard-hit hotel sector. in the residential mortgage market, financing conditions remained accommodative particularly for borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. mortgage rates increased slightly over the intermeeting period but remained very low by historical standards. credit availability continued to improve, especially for jumbo loans and lower-score federal housing administration borrowers. indicators of mortgage originations for homepurchases and refinancing were solid through august. the share of mortgages in forbearance declined further in july and august. financing conditions for consumer credit remained accommodative for most borrowers, especially those with stronger credit scores. consumer credit and the credit card market expanded at a strong pace in june before stepping down somewhat in july. conditions for nonprime consumers in the credit card market eased from tight levels. auto loan growth slowed in june and july from its brisk pace in may. conditions in the assetbacked securities market were robust over the intermeeting period. staff economic outlook the projection for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the september fomc meeting was broadly similar to the july projection. in the second half of 2021, supply constraints were expected to resolve more slowly than previously assumed; in addition, the recent rise in covid-19 cases was viewed as likely to exert a larger amount of restraint on consumer spending, hiring, and labor supply than previously anticipated. even so, real gdp was expected to post a sizable gain over the second half of 2021 and over the year as a whole, resulting in a correspondingly large decline in the unemployment rate. in 2022, gdp was expected to rise more slowly than in 2021 but at a still-solid pace, supported by the continued reopening of the economy and an easing of supply constraints. with the boost from these factors fading, real gdp growth was projected to step down noticeably in 2023 and to be roughly equal to potential output growth in 2023 and 2024. however, the level of real gdp was expected to remain well above potential throughout the projection period, resulting in a decline in the unemployment rate to historically low levels. the staff’s near-term outlook for inflation was revised up further in response to incoming data, but the staff continued to expect that this year’s rise in inflation would prove to be transitory. the 12-month change in total and core pce prices was well above 2 percent in july, and available data suggested that pce price inflation had remained high in august. the staff interpreted recent inflation data as indicating that supply constraints were putting a larger amount of upward pressure on prices than previously anticipated; relative to the july projection, these supply constraints were also expected to take longer to resolve. as a result, the 12-month change in pce prices was projected to hold roughly steady over the remainder of 2021 and to end the year well above 2 percent. over the following year, the boost to consumer prices caused by supply issues was expected to partly reverse and import prices were expected to decelerate sharply. pce price inflation was therefore expected to step down to a little below 2 percent in 2022; thereafter, additional increases in resource utilization were expected to cause it to gradually edge higher and to reach 2 percent in 2024. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside. in particular, the future course of the pandemic was seen as an important source of downside risk. the staff also continued to judge that the risks around the inflation projection were tilted to the upside, with the possibility of more severe and persistent supply issues viewed as especially salient. in addition, the staff pointed to a risk that longer-run inflation expectations would move appreciably higher and lead to persistently elevated inflation. participants’ views on current economic conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2021 through 2024 and over the longer run based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each minutes of the meeting of september 21–22, 2021 page 7  variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. in their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that, with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months, but the rise in covid-19 cases had slowed their recovery. inflation was elevated, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants noted that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. participants observed that economic activity had continued to expand in recent months, though at a less rapid pace than in the first half of the year. they marked down their projections of real gdp growth for the year, pointing to a reassessment of the severity and likely duration of supply constraints or of the effects of the spread of the delta variant on the economy. still, participants foresaw rapid growth this year, and several highlighted that the economy had shown resilience in the face of the recent wave of infections. in their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that consumer spending had decelerated in recent months after expanding at a very rapid pace in the first half of the year. the spread of the delta variant was weighing on spending for some consumer services, and low inventories and high prices due to supply constraints were restraining spending on many goods, most notably motor vehicles. nonetheless, participants expected the accumulated stock of savings, the release of pent-up demand, and progress on vaccinations to continue to support household spending in coming months. participants noted that residential construction had been restrained by shortages of materials and other inputs and that home sales had been held back by limited supplies of available homes. with respect to the business sector, participants observed that firms in a number of industries were facing challenges keeping up with strong demand due to wide- spread supply chain bottlenecks as well as labor shortages. some participants commented that the recent global wave of covid-19 infections and associated business shutdowns were exacerbating or prolonging these problems. the supply chain bottlenecks were creating challenges for a number of manufacturers; the problems were seen as especially acute for the motor vehicle industry, where the shortages of semiconductor chips had sharply curtailed production. retail industries were also facing various bottlenecks, including those stemming from port congestion and delays in ground transportation. participants noted that their district contacts generally did not expect these bottlenecks to be fully resolved until sometime next year or even later. a couple of participants noted that inventories-to-sales ratios were at or near record-low levels in many industries, and the need to rebuild them would boost business investment going forward. participants also discussed the developments in oil, gasoline, and agricultural sectors. a couple of participants pointed out that hurricane ida significantly affected the oil and gas industries, curtailing u.s. offshore production at a time of low inventories. a couple of other participants noted that elevated crop prices were continuing to boost income in the agricultural sector. participants noted that labor market conditions had continued to improve in recent months. the unemployment rate declined further to 5.2 percent in august, and a few participants noted a further pickup in recent months in the level of activity indicator in the federal reserve bank of kansas city’s labor market conditions indicators. after a rapid pace of almost 1 million per month in june and july, job gains slowed to 235,000 in august as the resurgence of covid-19 cases weighed on employment in high-contact service sectors, particularly in the leisure and hospitality sector. meanwhile, the labor force participation rate was little changed, remaining at a lower level than its pre-pandemic values. some participants noted that the increase in labor force participation that they had expected had not yet materialized in the wake of the reopening of schools and the expiration of the extended unemployment benefits, and that this likely reflected in part concerns about the resurgence of the virus, childcare challenges, and the uncertainties generated by ongoing disruptions to in-person schooling. participants expected the labor market to continue to improve in coming months. several participants indicated that a rise in the labor force participation rate might lag the improvements in other indicators such as the unemployment rate—a pattern consistent with past business cycle recoveries. participants expressed a range page 8 federal open market committee  of views regarding the extent to which they expected the labor force participation rate and the epop ratio would move back to their pre-pandemic levels. various participants suggested that a complete return to pre-pandemic conditions was unlikely, as the pandemic had prompted reductions in the workforce that were likely to persist, including a large number of retirements and other departures from the labor force. a number of others, however, assessed that once the covid-related concerns that were currently weighing on labor force participation passed, the participation rate and the epop ratio could return to, or even exceed, the pre-pandemic levels. some participants remarked that the labor market recovery continued to be uneven across demographic and income groups and across sectors, with the recovery being particularly slow for women with young children and people with lower incomes. participants noted that their district contacts had broadly reported having difficulty hiring workers. the labor shortages were causing firms to reduce hours and scale back production while also leading employers to provide incentives to attract and retain workers, including wage increases and signing and retention bonuses. the rate of nominal wage growth had been robust in recent data; for example, average hourly earnings were up 4.9 percent at an annualized rate over the past six months. in their discussion of inflation, participants observed that the inflation rate was elevated, and they expected that it would likely remain so in coming months before moderating. participants marked up their inflation projections, as they assessed that supply constraints in product and labor markets were larger and likely to be longer lasting than previously anticipated. some participants expressed concerns that elevated rates of inflation could feed through into longer-term inflation expectations of households and businesses or saw recent inflation data as suggestive of broader inflation pressures. several other participants pointed out that the largest contributors to the recent elevated measures of inflation were a handful of covid-related, pandemic-sensitive categories in which specific, identifiable bottlenecks were at play. this observation suggested that the upward pressure on prices would abate as the covid-related demand and supply imbalances subsided. these participants noted that prices in some of those categories showed signs of stabilizing or even turned down of late. many participants pointed out that the owners’ equivalent rent component of price indexes should be monitored carefully, as rising home prices could lead to upward pressure on rents. a few participants noted that there was not yet evidence that robust wage growth was exerting upward pressure on prices to a significant degree, but also that the possibility merited close monitoring. in their comments on inflation expectations, several participants observed that measures of longer-term inflation expectations, including tips- and survey-based measures, had remained in ranges that were viewed as broadly consistent with the committee’s longer-run inflation goal, or that the distribution across households of longer-term expected inflation had remained stable over the past two years. many participants noted the substantial rise in one- and three-year measures of inflation expectations in the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations or in the oneyear measure in the university of michigan surveys of consumers. a few participants remarked that these survey measures tended to be sensitive to movements in actual inflation, or that the recent rise was consistent with previous historical relationships between such measures and actual inflation. in discussing the uncertainty and risks associated with the economic outlook, participants noted that uncertainty remained high. a number of participants judged that the uncertain course of the virus, supply chain disruptions, and labor shortages complicated the task of interpreting incoming economic data and assessing progress toward the committee’s goals. participants generally saw the risks to the outlook for economic activity as broadly balanced. uncertainty around the course of the virus, the resolution of supply constraints, and fiscal measures were cited as presenting both upside and downside risks. in addition, some participants mentioned the risks associated with high asset valuations in the united states and abroad, and a number of participants commented on the importance of resolving the issues involving the federal government budget and debt ceiling in a timely manner. most participants saw inflation risks as weighted to the upside because of concerns that supply disruptions and labor shortages might last longer and might have larger or more persistent effects on prices and wages than they currently assumed. a few participants commented that there were also some downside risks for inflation, as the factors that had held inflation down over the previous long expansion were likely still in place. in their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the federal reserve’s commitment to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. minutes of the meeting of september 21–22, 2021 page 9  economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. participants judged that the current stance of monetary policy remained appropriate to promote maximum employment as well as to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time and longerterm inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent. participants also reiterated that the existing outcome-based guidance implied that the paths of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet would depend on actual progress toward reaching the committee’s maximum-employment and inflation goals. these participants also suggested that labor supply constraints were the main impediments to further improvement in labor market conditions rather than lack of demand. they noted that adding monetary policy accommodation at this time would not address such constraints or that the costs of continuing asset purchases might be beginning to exceed their benefits. all participants agreed that it would be appropriate for the current meeting’s postmeeting statement to relay the committee’s judgment that, if progress continued broadly as expected, a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. participants resumed their discussions on the progress made toward the committee’s goals since december 2020, when the committee adopted its guidance regarding asset purchases and indicated that purchases would continue at their current pace until substantial further progress had been made toward the committee’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. these purchases had been a critical part of the federal reserve’s efforts to foster smooth financial market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses as well as the economic recovery. most participants remarked that the standard of “substantial further progress” had been met with regard to the committee’s price-stability goal or that it was likely to be met soon. with regard to the committee’s maximum-employment goal, participants considered the cumulative degree of improvement in the labor market since december 2020. in doing so, participants cited the progress recorded in a number of individual series, including, among others, the employment-to-population ratio, the unemployment rate, claims for unemployment insurance, job openings, nominal wage growth, and increases in payrolls, as well as in summary measures of the labor situation. some participants observed that progress on labor force participation was lagging. many participants noted that although the economic recovery had slowed recently and the august increase in payrolls had fallen short of expectations, the labor market had continued to show improvement since the committee’s previous meeting. a number of participants assessed that the standard of substantial further progress toward the goal of maximum employment had not yet been attained but that, if the economy proceeded roughly as they anticipated, it may soon be reached. on the basis of the cumulative performance of the labor market since december 2020, a number of other participants indicated that they believed that the test of “substantial further progress” toward maximum employment had been met. some of participants also expressed their views on how slowing in the pace of purchases might proceed. in particular, participants commented on an illustrative path, developed by the staff and reflecting participants’ discussions at the committee’s july meeting, that gave the speed and composition associated with a tapering of asset purchases. the illustrative tapering path was designed to be simple to communicate and entailed a gradual reduction in the pace of net asset purchases that, if begun later this year, would lead the federal reserve to end purchases around the middle of next year. the path featured monthly reductions in the pace of asset purchases, by $10 billion in the case of treasury securities and $5 billion in the case of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs). participants generally commented that the illustrative path provided a straightforward and appropriate template that policymakers might follow, and a couple of participants observed that giving advance notice to the general public of a plan along these lines may reduce the risk of an adverse market reaction to a moderation in asset purchases. participants noted that, in keeping with the outcome-based standard for initiating a tapering of asset purchases, the committee could adjust the pace of the moderation of its purchases if economic developments were to differ substantially from what they expected. several participants indicated that they preferred to proceed with a more rapid moderation of purchases than described in the illustrative examples. no decision to proceed with a moderation of asset purchases was made at the meeting, but participants generally assessed that, provided that the economic recovery remained broadly on track, a gradual tapering process that concluded around the middle of next year would likely be appropriate. participants noted that if a decision to begin tapering purchases occurred at the next meeting, the process of tapering could commence with the monthly purchase calendars beginning in either midnovember or mid-december. page 10 federal open market committee  many participants remarked upon risk-management considerations and the way in which these figured into their thinking on asset purchases and the appropriate policy stance. a number of downside risks to the economic outlook were cited, including a potential tightening of financial conditions, the possibility that another rise in covid-19 cases would slow the economic recovery by more than expected, and the prospect that fiscal policy could become a source of economic headwinds as the effects of previous support measures receded. upside risks to the economic outlook included the possibility that there would be additional expansionary fiscal actions or that consumer spending would rise by more than expected as households reduced the large volume of savings that they had accumulated during the pandemic. with regard to inflation, upside risks cited included the possibility that elevated levels of inflation would continue for longer than expected, especially if labor and other supply shortages proved more persistent than currently anticipated, or that longer-term inflation expectations might move above levels consistent with the committee’s longer-term inflation objective of 2 percent. downside risks to inflation included the possibility of a decline in inflation expectations that might occur if the public misconstrued the federal reserve’s reaction function as less accommodative than it actually was. several participants expressed concern that the high degree of accommodation being provided by monetary policy, including through continued asset purchases, could increase risks to financial stability. participants reaffirmed that the committee’s “substantial further progress” standard regarding its asset purchases was distinct from the criteria given in its forward guidance on the federal funds rate and that a policy shift toward a moderation of asset purchases provided no direct signal about its interest rate policy. rather, the committee had articulated a different, and more stringent, test concerning the conditions that would need to be met before it started raising the target range for the federal funds rate. various participants stressed that economic conditions were likely to justify keeping the rate at or near its lower bound over the next couple of years. in addition to noting that the economy was still well below maximum employment, several of these participants suggested that there would likely be sustained downward pressure on inflation in the years ahead. these participants stated that, in such circumstances, a major challenge facing policymakers—especially in the presence of the effective lower bound on the federal funds rate—was to maintain a policy stance sufficiently accommodative to keep average inflation at 2 percent and thereby bolster the credibility of the committee’s new policy framework, facilitating the achievement of both maximum employment and price stability. in contrast, a number of participants raised the possibility of beginning to increase the target range by the end of next year because they expected that the labor market and inflation outcomes specified in the committee’s guidance on the federal funds rate might be achieved by that time; some of these participants saw inflation as likely to remain elevated in 2022 with risks to the upside. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. they noted that the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but that the rise in covid-19 cases had slowed their recovery. inflation was elevated, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members also acknowledged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations would likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remained. members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. all members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, and with inflation having run persistently below this longerrun goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. members expected to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until those outcomes were achieved. all members agreed to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent, and they expected that it would be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation had risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. last december, the committee indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least minutes of the meeting of september 21–22, 2021 page 11  $80 billion per month and of agency mbs by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward its maximum employment and price stability goals. the members commented that, since then, the economy had made progress toward these goals and that, if progress continued broadly as expected, a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. they judged that these asset purchases would help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. members agreed that the postmeeting statement should acknowledge the slowing of the economic recovery, as indicated in data received since the july meeting, as well as ongoing elevated inflation readings. in light of these developments, they agreed that the committee should indicate that the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but that the rise in covid-19 cases had slowed their recovery, and they also concurred that it would be appropriate to characterize inflation as being “elevated” in place of stating that inflation had “risen.” members further decided to add to the postmeeting statement an indication that if progress toward the maximum-employment and price-stability goals continued broadly as expected, the committee judged that a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. members agreed that the addition of this language was an appropriate means of acknowledging that, in the near future, the committee would likely assess that the standard for reducing the pace of net asset purchases had been met. with regard to the directive to the desk, members agreed that the directive should incorporate the proposed increase in the per-counterparty limit for the on rrp facility to $160 billion. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective september 23, 2021, the federal open market committee directs the desk to:  undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent.  increase the system open market account holdings of treasury securities by $80 billion per month and of agency mortgagebacked securities (mbs) by $40 billion per month.  increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts and purchase agency commercial mortgagebacked securities (cmbs) as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities.  conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the percounterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs.  allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: page 12 federal open market committee  “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months, but the rise in covid-19 cases has slowed their recovery. inflation is elevated, largely reflecting transitory factors. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations will likely continue to reduce the effects of the public health crisis on the economy, but risks to the economic outlook remain. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation having run persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer‑term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. the committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. last december, the committee indicated that it would continue to increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $80 billion per month and of agency mortgage‑backed securities by at least $40 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward its maximum employment and price stability goals. since then, the economy has made progress toward these goals. if progress continues broadly as expected, the committee judges that a moderation in the pace of asset purchases may soon be warranted. these asset purchases help foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, thomas i. barkin, raphael w. bostic, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, mary c. daly, charles l. evans, randal k. quarles, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective september 23, 2021. the board also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective september 23, 2021. following the fomc policy vote, the chair emphasized that maintaining the public trust is absolutely essential for the work of the federal reserve. in light of recent questions regarding the financial transactions of senior officials, the chair indicated that the staff would conduct a thorough review of the federal reserve’s current rules and regulations regarding the financial holdings and practices of federal reserve officials. this deliberate and thoughtful review will focus on strengthening federal reserve rules and standards in ways that will help guard against even the appearance of conflicts of interest or any other improprieties. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, november 2– 3, 2021. the meeting adjourned at 10:45 a.m. on september 22, 2021. minutes of the meeting of september 21–22, 2021 page 13  notation vote by notation vote completed on august 17, 2021, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on july 27–28, 2021.  james a. clouse secretary 
e november 3, 2021 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. today, the fomc kept interest rates near zero and, in light of the progress the economy has made toward our goals, decided to begin reducing the pace of asset purchases. with these actions, monetary policy will continue to provide strong support to the economic recovery. given the unprecedented nature of the disruptions related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy, we remain attentive to risks and will ensure that our policy is well positioned to address the full range of plausible economic outcomes. i will say more about our monetary policy decisions after reviewing recent economic developments. economic activity expanded at a 6.5 percent pace in the first half of the year, reflecting progress on vaccinations, the reopening of the economy, and strong policy support. in the third quarter, real gdp growth slowed notably from this rapid pace. the summer’s surge in covid cases from the delta variant has held back the recovery in the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic, including travel and leisure. activity has also been restrained by supply constraints and bottlenecks, notably in the motor vehicle industry. as a result, both household spending and business investment flattened out last quarter. nonetheless, aggregate demand has been very strong this year, buoyed by fiscal and monetary policy support and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. with covid case counts receding further and progress on vaccinations, economic growth should pick up this quarter, resulting in strong growth for the year as a whole.  conditions in the labor market have continued to improve, and demand for workers remains very strong. as with overall economic activity, the pace of improvement slowed with the rise in covid cases. in august and september, job gains averaged 280,000 per month, down from an average of about 1 million jobs per month in june and july. the slowdown has been concentrated in sectors most sensitive to the pandemic, including leisure and hospitality and education. the unemployment rate was 4.8 percent in september. this figure understates the shortfall in employment, particularly as participation in the labor market remains subdued. some of the softness in participation likely reflects the aging of the population and retirements. but participation for prime-aged individuals also remains well below pre-pandemic levels—in part reflecting factors related to the pandemic, such as caregiving needs and ongoing concerns about the virus. as a result, employers are having difficulties filling job openings. these impediments to labor supply should diminish with further progress on containing the virus—supporting gains in employment and economic activity. the economic downturn has not fallen equally on all americans, and those least able to shoulder the burden have been hardest hit. despite progress, joblessness continues to fall disproportionately on african americans and hispanics. the supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have contributed to sizable price increases in some sectors. in particular, bottlenecks and supply chain disruptions are limiting how quickly production can respond to the rebound in demand in the near term. as a result, overall inflation is running well above our 2 percent longer-run goal. supply constraints have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated. nonetheless, it remains the case that the drivers of higher inflation have been predominantly  connected to the dislocations caused by the pandemic—specifically, the effects on supply and demand from the shutdown, the uneven reopening, and the ongoing effects of the virus itself. we understand the difficulties that high inflation poses for individuals and families, particularly those with limited means to absorb higher prices for essentials such as food and transportation. our tools cannot ease supply constraints. like most forecasters, we continue to believe that our dynamic economy will adjust to the supply and demand imbalances and that, as it does, inflation will decline to levels much closer to our 2 percent longer-run goal. of course, it is very difficult to predict the persistence of supply constraints or their effects on inflation. global supply chains are complex; they will return to normal function, but the timing of that is highly uncertain. we are committed to our longer-run goal of 2 percent inflation and to having longer-term inflation expectations well anchored at this goal. if we were to see signs that the path of inflation, or [of] longer-term inflation expectations, was moving materially and persistently beyond levels consistent with our goal, we would use our tools to preserve price stability. we will be watching carefully to see whether the economy is evolving in line with expectations. the fed’s policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people, along with our responsibilities to promote the stability of the financial system. our asset purchases have been a critical tool. they helped preserve financial stability early in the pandemic and since then have helped foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions to support the economy. last december, the committee stated its intention to continue asset purchases at a pace of at least $120 billion per month until substantial further progress has been made toward our  maximum-employment and price-stability goals. at today’s meeting, the committee judged that the economy has met this test, and decided to begin reducing the pace of its asset purchases. beginning later this month, we will reduce the monthly pace of our net asset purchases by $10 billion for treasury securities and $5 billion for agency mortgage-backed securities. we also announced another reduction of this size in the monthly purchase pace starting in mid- december, since that month’s purchase schedule will be released by the federal reserve bank of new york prior to our december fomc meeting. if the economy evolves broadly as expected, we judge that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, implying that increases in our securities holdings would cease by the middle of next year. that said, we are prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. and even after our balance sheet stops expanding, our holdings of securities will continue to support accommodative financial conditions. our decision today to begin tapering our asset purchases does not imply any direct signal regarding our interest rate policy. we continue to articulate a different and more stringent test for the economic conditions that would need to be met before raising the federal funds rate. to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to complete the recovery in employment and achieve our price-stability goal. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to nick at the wall street journal. nick timiraos. hi. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. chair powell, the markets anticipate you will raise rates once or twice next year. are they wrong?  chair powell. so i would say it this way. we try to focus on what we can control—and that is how to communicate as clearly as possible, in this highly uncertain world, how we’re thinking about the economic outlook and the balance of risks and how policy will evolve in that case and also in the cases, which are frequent, where the economy evolves in unexpected ways. so the focus at this meeting is on tapering asset purchases, not on raising rates. it is time to taper, we think, because the economy has achieved substantial further progress toward our goals, measured from last december. we don’t think it’s time yet to raise interest rates. there is still ground to cover to reach maximum employment, both in terms of employment and in terms of participation. getting to your question, our baseline expectation is that supply bottlenecks and shortages will persist well into next year, and elevated inflation as well, and that, as the pandemic subsides, supply chain bottlenecks will abate—and job growth will move back up. and as that happens, inflation will decline from today’s elevated levels. of course, the timing of that is highly uncertain. but, certainly, we should see inflation moving down by the second or third quarter. the time for lifting rates and beginning to remove accommodation will depend on the path of the economy. we think we can be patient. if a response is called for, we will not hesitate. so, what i will tell you is, we will be watching carefully to see whether the economy evolves in line with our expectations, and policy will adapt appropriately. and that’s what i would say. nick timiraos. based on—if i could follow up, based on your current outlook for the labor market, do you think it’s possible—or likely, even—that maximum employment could be achieved by the second half of next year?  chair powell. so if you look at the progress that we’ve made over the course of the last year, if that pace were to continue, then the answer would be: “yes, i do think that that is possible.” of course, we measure maximum employment based on a wide range of figures, but it’s certainly within the realm of possibility. nick timiraos. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. next, we’ll go to jeanna at the new york times. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. i was wondering if you could detail a little bit how you’re thinking about wages at this moment. obviously, we’re seeing strong wage growth, particularly for people in sort of lower-income fields. i wonder if you see that as a positive thing or as a potential start to a wage–price spiral and sort of how you sort of delineate those two things. chair powell. so wages have been moving up strongly, very strongly. and, in particular, i would point to the employment compensation index reading that we got last friday. now, in real terms, they’ve been—they had been running a little bit below inflation, so real wages were not really increasing. i think, with the eci reading, it becomes close to maybe not increasing, but close to back to zero in terms of the real increase. so wages moving up, of course, is how standard of living increases over the years for generation upon generation. it’s very important, and it’s generally a good thing. you know, the concern is a somewhat unusual case where, if wages were to be rising persistently and materially above inflation and productivity gains, that could put upward pressure on, or downward pressure on margins and cause companies to—or employers, really—to raise prices as a result, and you can see yourself, find yourself in what we used to call a wage–price spiral. we don’t have evidence of that yet. productivity has been very high. the eci reading is just one reading. again, if you look back,  we—so we’ll be watching this carefully. but i would say that, at this point, we don’t see troubling increases in wages. and we don’t expect those to emerge, but we’ll be watching carefully. joe pavel. next, we’ll go to steve liesman from cnbc. steve liesman. thank you, mr. chairman. i wonder if you could perhaps give us your thinking about the tradeoffs between inflation and unemployment. you talked about the shortfall of unemployment—reemployment relative to before the pandemic, and yet you have inflation, which is affecting everybody. are we at, or close to, a point where the risk of inflation is greater than the benefit that you’d—for recovering these lost jobs so that now, from a risk- management standpoint, it makes sense to move more aggressively on rate hikes? and kind of a related question: the statement today says you’ll keep policy accommodative until you hit that 2 percent inflation target. our surveys show looking for 5 percent inflation this year, 3½ percent next year—it sure seems like you’re on track to modestly or moderately exceed that 2 percent target. thanks. chair powell. yes. so i’m not sure i totally got your first question, but i would say—in fact, could you just quickly, succinctly, say your first question again? steve liesman. sure. the idea that the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment, that you would keep policy accommodative to put this 5 million folks, or find these 5 million jobs again, at the same time all americans will be suffering from higher inflation—is that tradeoff worth it, or is it better or smarter to raise rates right now to combat inflation and perhaps not lean so heavily on the employment side of the mandate? chair powell. yes, so, you know, this isn’t the traditional phillips curve situation where there’s a direct tradeoff, where that’s really what we’re talking about. the inflation that  we’re seeing is really not due to a tight labor market. it’s due to bottlenecks, and it’s due to shortages, and it’s due to very strong demand meeting those. so i think it’s not the classical situation where you have that precise tradeoff. but, you know, in this situation, we do have a provision in our statement on longer-run goals, as you know, that says when those two things are in tension, what we do is, we take into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with the mandate. so we used to call that the “balanced approach” paragraph. we have to think about the amount of the deviation, we have to think about the time it will take, and we have to make policy in a world where the two goals are in tension. it’s very difficult. but what it really boils down to is something that’s common sense. and that is risk management. we have to be aware of the risks that we’re—particularly now the risk of significantly higher inflation. we see shortages and bottlenecks persisting into next year, well into next year. we see higher inflation persisting, and we have to be in position to address that risk should it become really a threat to—should it create a threat of more persistent, longer-term inflation. and that’s what we think our policy is doing now. it’s putting us in a position to be able to address the range of plausible outcomes. joe pavel. thank you. next, we’ll go to colby smith at the financial times. colby smith. thank you. chair powell, what are the economic conditions that would perhaps warrant a faster pace of tapering? and i’m wondering how you would also characterize the risks that the fed may actually need to accelerate that process eventually. thank you.  chair powell. so i guess, as i said in my opening remarks, assuming the economy performs broadly as expected, the committee judges that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, and we’re prepared to deviate from that path if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. so i’m not going to give you a lot more detail on what that might be. of course, if we do see something like that happening, if it becomes a question, then we’ll communicate very transparently and openly about that. but i’m just going to leave it with the words that are in the statement. sorry, was there a second part? colby smith. yes. it’s just on characterizing the risks that you might actually have to do so later on. chair powell. you know, i would just leave you with the words we have here. we are prepared to speed up or slow down the pace of reductions in asset purchases if it’s warranted by changes in the economic outlook. and, again, if we feel like something like that’s happening, then we’ll be very transparent about it. we wouldn’t want to surprise markets. we’ll say, in light of this factor or these factors, we are considering doing this, and then we would either do it or not do it. but so—but i’m not going to, you know, start making up examples of what that might be today. thanks. colby smith. thank you. joe pavel. thank you. next one, rachel siegel at the washington post. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. thank you so much for taking our questions. you mentioned at the beginning that the fed understands the difficulties that high inflation poses for individuals and families, especially those with limited means. what is your message to those  families or consumers that are struggling with higher prices right now, and do you feel that your expectations around transitory inflation, that message is reaching them? thank you. chair powell. yes. so, first of all, it is our job to—and we accept responsibility and accountability for inflation in the medium term. we’re accountable to congress and to the american people for maximum employment and price stability. the level of inflation we have right now is not at all consistent with price stability. by the way, we’re also not at maximum employment, as i mentioned. so i would want to assure people that we will use our tools as appropriate to get inflation under control. we don’t think it’s a good time to raise interest rates, though, because we want to see the labor market heal further. and we have very good reason to think that that will happen as the delta variant declines, so—which it’s doing now. so “transitory” is a word that people have had different understandings of. for some, it carries a sense of “short lived,” and that’s, you know, there’s a real time component—measured in months, let’s say. really, for us, what “transitory” has meant is that if something is transitory, it will not leave behind it permanently or very persistently higher inflation. so that’s why we, you know, we took a step back from “transitory.” we said “expected to be transitory,” first of all, to show uncertainty around that—we’ve always said that, by the way, in other contexts; we just hadn’t done it in the statement—but also to acknowledge, really, that it means different things to different people. and then we added some language to really explain more what we’re talking about in paragraph two and paragraph three. we said that “supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have contributed to sizable price increases,” and we said, “progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints are expected to support continued gains in  economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation.” so we’re trying to explain what we mean and also acknowledging more uncertainty about “transitory.” so it’s, i mean, it’s become a word that’s attracted a lot of attention that maybe is distracting from our message, which we want to be as clear as possible. ultimately, the only other thing i would say is, look, we understand completely that it’s particularly people who are living paycheck to paycheck or seeing higher grocery costs, higher gasoline costs—when the winter comes, higher heating costs for their homes. we understand completely what they’re going through. and, you know, we will use our tools over time to make sure that that doesn’t become a permanent feature of life. really, that’s one of our principal jobs, along with achieving maximum employment. and that’s our commitment. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to chris rugaber of the associated press. chris rugaber. great. thank you, michelle. thank you, chair powell. well, i wonder if you could update us. you talked about getting back to full employment, and so could you update how you define that? i mean, you’ve, you know—a few months ago, yourself and other fed officials talked about getting back to the pre-covid labor market. there were even hints you might try to do something better than that. now we heard talk of, as you mentioned, people retiring, and there’s talk of not being able to get back as—all the jobs back because of that and other trends. you did mention the prime-age folks. so can you give us some examples of things you're looking at, specifically, to measure full employment? will you be looking at prime-age employment population ratio, for example, and, if so, do you need to see it get back to pre-covid levels to achieve maximum employment, or is there something short of that that would work? thank you.  chair powell. thanks. so maximum employment is, it’s a broad—what would we say?—broad-based and inclusive goal that’s not directly measurable and changes over time due to various factors. you can’t specify a specific goal. so it’s taking into account quite a broad range of things, and, of course, employment—levels of employment—[and] participation are a part of that. but, in addition, there are other measures of what’s going on in the labor market, like wages is a key measure of how tight the labor market is—the level of quits, the amount of job openings, the flows in and out of various states. so we look at so many different things, and you make an overall judgment. now, the temptation at the beginning of the recovery was to look at the data in february of 2020 and say, well, that’s the goal because we didn’t know any—that’s what we knew. we knew that was achievable in a context of low inflation. i think we’re in a, you know, we’re learning that. we have to be humble about what we know about this economy, which is still very, you know, covid-affected, by the way. a lot of what we’re seeing in the last 90 days is because of delta. we were on a path to a very different place. delta put us on a different path. and we see these things. but, so i think we’re going to have to—ideally, we would have, we would see further development of the labor market in a context where there isn’t another covid spike, and then we would be able to see, i think, a lot. we would see whether—how does participation react in that world, in that sort of post-covid world? right now, people are staying out of the labor market because of caretaking [and] because of fear of covid to a significant extent. you know, we thought that schools reopening and elapsing unemployment benefits would produce some sort of additional labor supply. that doesn’t seem to have been the case, interestingly. so i think there’s room for a whole lot of humility here, as we try to think about what maximum employment would be. we’re going to  have to see some time post-covid so that we know—or post-delta, anyway—to see what is possible. and i think the learning for those of us who lived through the last cycle is that, over time, you can get to places that didn’t look possible. now, what we also have now, though, is, we have high inflation. so we have a completely different situation now where we have high inflation, and we have to balance that with what’s going on in the employment market. so it’s a complicated situation, and i would say, we will, we hope to achieve significantly greater clarity about where this economy is going and what the characteristics of the post-pandemic economy are over the first half of next year. joe pavel. thanks. we’ll go to howard schneider at reuters. howard schneider. thanks, and thanks for doing this. so, given that answer about employment, i would like to get back to steve’s question a little bit. on a headline basis, just as it’s evolved this year, do you feel that the two tests on inflation have been met? chair powell. sorry, the two tests? howard schneider. the two tests in the statement—the guidance that it has to hit 2 percent and be on track to moderately be above 2 percent. has the economy cleared that? chair powell. that’s a decision for the committee. i would put it to you this way. when we reach maximum employment, when we reach a state where labor market conditions are at maximum employment in the committee’s judgment, it’s very possible that the inflation test will already be met. we’re aware that that language sounds, it sounds a little out of touch with what’s going on, but, you know, we’re not at maximum employment. when that is the case, we’ll look to see whether the inflation test is met, and there’s a good chance that it will be if you look at how inflation has evolved in the last year and a half.  howard schneider. so, to follow up, so you’re not willing to commit that the current levels of inflation and their persistence have met “moderately” and “for some time.” so, given that, i mean, how should we wonder what “moderately” over and “for some time” mean? chair powell. what i’m really saying is, that question is not before us right now. you know, we had the question on when to taper. we’ve now answered that question and the speed of it and all that. we have not focused on whether we meet the liftoff test, because we don’t meet the liftoff test now because we’re not at maximum employment. what i’m saying is, given where inflation is and where it’s projected to be, let’s say we do meet the maximum-employment test. then the committee—the question for the committee at that time will be, has the inflation test been met? and, you know, i don’t want to get ahead of the committee on that, but the answer may very well be “yes, it’s been met.” but we’re not asking that question today, because we’re not running a liftoff test. we’re not evaluating the liftoff test today. we didn’t have that discussion at today’s meeting. we did talk about the economy and the development of the economy, but we didn’t ask ourselves whether the liftoff test is met, because, you know, it’s clearly not met on the maximum-employment side. howard schneider. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to matthew boesler at bloomberg. matthew boesler. hi, chair powell. matthew boesler with bloomberg. so, when you’re looking at this question of assessing whether or not the u.s. economy is at maximum employment, do you have a framework for making that judgment that is independent of what inflation is doing? and, if not, does it kind of complicate that assessment, given all of the uncertainty about inflation right now and the inclination to believe that, you know, the high inflation we’re seeing is not related to capacity utilization in the labor market? thank you.  chair powell. so we don’t actually define maximum employment as—we define it in terms of inflation, but, of course, there is a connection there. maximum employment has to be a level that is consistent with stable prices. but that’s not really how we think about it. we think about maximum employment as looking at a broad range of things. you can’t just look at— unlike inflation, where you can have a number. but with maximum employment, you could be in a situation, hypothetically, where the unemployment rate is low, but there are many people who are out of the labor force and will come back in. and so you wouldn’t really be at maximum employment, because there’s this group that isn’t counted as unemployed. so we look at a range of things. so the thing is, by many measures, we are at a very tight labor market. i mentioned quits and job openings and wages and things. many of them are signaling a tight labor market, but the issue is, how persistent is that? because you have people who are held out of the labor market, you know, of their own—they’re holding themselves out of the labor market because of caretaking needs or because of fear of covid, or, for whatever reason, they’re staying out. and it’s clear that there are, you know—with tremendous demand for workers and wages moving up, it does seem like we’re set up to go back to a higher job- creation rate. so that would suggest that you’re not at maximum employment. so, at the end of the day, it is a judgment thing. but, of course, at the end of it, it also has to be a level of employment that’s consistent with price stability. matthew boesler. and if i could just follow up briefly, you know, you’ve talked a little bit about this possibility that the two goals might be in tension and how you would have to balance those two things. could you talk a little bit about what the fed’s process for balancing those two goals would be in the event that, say, come next year, you decide there’s a serious risk of persistent inflationary pressures despite ongoing employment shortfalls?  chair powell. yes. i mean, again, it’s a risk-management thing. it’s not—i can’t reduce it to an equation, but, ultimately, it’s about risk management. so you want to be in a position to act, to cover the full range of plausible outcomes, not just the base case. and in this case, the risk is skewed. for now, it appears to be skewed toward higher inflation. so we need to be in a position to act in case it becomes necessary to do so or appropriate to do so, and we think we will be. so that’s how we’re thinking about it. and i think, though, that, judgmentally, too, it’s appropriate to be patient. it’s appropriate for us to see what the labor market and what the economy look like when they heal further. we know that we were on a path to a different place, as i mentioned, when delta arrived. and delta stopped, it stopped job creation. it stopped that transition away from a goods-focused economy where there’s excess demand for goods because there—services are not available. people are not traveling. that transition itself could help bring inflation down, because, presumably, people would spend a little less on goods while they start spending more on travel and all sorts of travel services and things like that. so we want to see that healthy process unfold as we decide what the true state of the economy is, and we think it will evolve in a way that will mean lower inflation. bottlenecks should be abating. we start to see that now with some of them, but, overall, they haven’t gotten better overall, and, you know, we’re very aware of that. so that’s really how we’re thinking about it. we’re thinking that time will tell us more. in the meantime, we don’t think it’s time to raise rates now. you know, if we do conclude that it’s necessary to do so, then we’ll be patient, but we won’t hesitate. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to edward lawrence at fox business.  edward lawrence. thank you, mr. chairman, for taking the call. so the federal reserve—i want to talk about climate change. the federal reserve released a statement today—says “the federal reserve supports the efforts . . . to identify key issues and potential solutions for the climate-related challenges most relevant to central banks and supervisory” outcomes. is this putting us on the path to regulate what banks can offer loans on or invest in, like coal plants or fossil fuels? chair powell. so that’s not a decision for bank regulators or for any agency. that’s a decision for elected representatives. so we feel that any role that we have—and we do think we have a role in climate change. it relates to our existing mandates, and our existing mandates are, really, prudential regulation of financial institutions. we expect them, and the public will expect us to expect them, to understand and be in a position to manage their risks. so that’s physical risk, and it’s transition risk for climate. and, by the way, the large financial institutions are doing this already, and, you know, we think that’s right within our mandate. there’s also a financial stability question, the overall stability of the financial system. and so, from that standpoint, we can do research. we can try to help understand what will the pathways be through which climate change effects the economy—both physical risk and transition risk. that’s what we can do, and that’s what we will do. and we’ll do it well. within the frame of our existing mandates, we’ll do it well. we’re not the people who will decide the national strategy on climate change. that has to be elected people, and not so much us. we feel like we have that narrow mandate, and we will do it well. edward lawrence. thank you. michelle smith. great, thank you. victoria guida at politico.  victoria guida. hi, chair powell. so the fed recently announced that there is going to be new conflict-of-interest rules for investments by fed officials, and this follows, obviously, the resignation of two regional fed presidents. and i’m just wondering, do you think that there is more that you will need to do to rebuild the credibility of the fed, such as, you know, requiring officials to put their assets in blind trusts? and also, if you could speak to whether you have any concerns that any rules or laws were broken by fed officials. thank you. chair powell. so we, you know, we—let me just say that this system, the ethics system we had in place had been in place for decades and had, as far as we know, served us well, and then that was no longer the case. and so we had no moment of denial about that. as a group, we stepped in, and we took the actions that we took. and, you know, within one fomc cycle, we announced a new set of rules to, you know, to try to put us back where we need to be, which is, we need to have the complete trust of the american people that we’re working in their interest all the time—absolutely critical to our work, as it is for any government agency. and i feel like this called that into question. so we reacted, i would characterize it, strongly and forcefully. if there were other things that we could do that were reasonable, we would certainly do them. so you asked me about blind trusts. you know, the overall authority for ethics around these issues in the federal government is the office of government ethics, oge. and they have a long-held position which is not favorable to blind trusts. they do not encourage them. they don’t think they’re effective. they think they’re cumbersome. and they think there are better ways to get at the things that need to be done. and those are the things that we’re actually doing. so i don’t know that there are any blind trusts, for that reason, because they are the, they’re the regulator. they say this on their website, if you look. in terms of laws broken, you know, i  asked the inspector general to look to see whether there were rules broken and whether there were laws broken, and i won’t speculate on that. but that is with the inspector general now and, of course, out of my hands. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to mike mckee at bloomberg. michael mckee. mr. chairman, the critics of your patience policy argue that, given the long and variable lags with which monetary policy works, that you are likely to end up, given inflation, by having to raise rates faster and farther than you would have liked and, therefore, send the economy into recession. given the fact that, basically, your forecast has been chasing inflation over the last year, and now you’re talking about it not coming down until the second or third quarter, why would they be wrong in thinking that? chair powell. well, so, let me say what’s happened—and we’re very, very straightforward about it—is that inflation has come in higher than expected, and bottlenecks have been more persistent and more prevalent. we see that just like everybody else does, and we see that they’re now on track to persist well into next year. that was not expected—not expected by us, not expected by other macro forecasters. now, let me say, you know, it’s difficult enough to just forecast the economy in normal times. when you’re talking about, you know, global supply chains in turmoil, it’s a whole different thing. and you’re talking about a pandemic that’s holding people out of the labor force for reasons that we can sample, but we don’t have a lot of experience with this. so it’s very, very difficult to forecast and not easy to set policy. so we have to set policy, though. so that’s what we’re doing. and, you know, so, to look at your question this way, i don’t think that we’re behind the curve. i actually believe that policy is well positioned to address the range of plausible  outcomes, and that’s what we need to do. i do think it would be premature to raise rates today. that’s not—i don’t think that’s controversial. certainly, i don’t know anyone arguing for that today. and the reason is that there’s still ground to cover to get to maximum employment. and we don’t want to stop that when there’s good reason to think—there’s still good reason to think, although it’s been delayed, clearly, there’s good reason to think that the economy will reopen, particularly if we do get past, you know, significant outbreaks of covid. that’s when we’re really going to see what the characteristics of the labor market are. and, you know, i think, you know, the bottlenecks that we’re seeing in global supply chains around goods and, frankly, now at our own domestic ports, because demand is stronger than the capacity of those ports—those things are going to work themselves out. we have a flexible economy. it’ll take some time, but, you know, it took—you know, the experts managed to create a vaccine faster than, certainly, than i expected. and i think this stuff will work itself out over the course of next year. that is my baseline understanding, and that’s a very widely held one among people. but, you know, we are prepared for different eventualities, and we will use our tools to achieve price stability and maximum employment. and we’re going to let the data lead us to where we need to go. our policy will adapt—and has already adapted—to the changing understanding of inflation and of bottlenecks and the whole supply-side story—which is also partly a demand story. so our policy will continue to adapt as is appropriate. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to nancy marshall-genzer at marketplace. nancy marshall-genzer. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking our questions. so you announced that the fed is going to taper at a rate of, starting at $15 billion a month, and that’s more than twice the pace of the last taper. so why are you tapering faster this time?  chair powell. the economy is in quite a different place than when we tapered back in, i guess it was, 2013. we were much farther away from maximum employment. inflation was much lower. this is an economy where demand is very, very strong, very strong, and job openings substantially exceed the number of unemployed people. so the need for further stimulus is far less than it was in 2013, where we still had quite a ways to go. i mean, after we began that taper, it was still many years before we reached what i would characterize as conditions consistent with maximum employment, let alone price stability. so this is quite a different situation, and, you know, the committee unanimously felt today that we had met the test that we’d articulated, and this was appropriate. and this is faster than, you know, than what people had expected six months ago. it’s earlier and faster, and that’s because our, as i mentioned, our policy has been adapting to the situation as it evolves, as it’s clarifying itself, and that’s partly because we see inflation coming in higher—so. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to mike derby. michael derby. yes, thank you for taking my question. i wonder if the fed has given any thoughts yet to the endgame for the balance sheet in terms of, you know, once you get the taper process complete, will you hold the balance sheet steady, or will you allow it to start passively winding down? and then, in a related question, do you have any greater insight into what fed bond buying actually does for the economy? in terms of its economic impact, have you been able to, you know, measure it or quantify it in any fashion, you know, because i’m sure you know there’s often been questions about, what is bond buying actually doing to help the economy? chair powell. sure. so in terms of the balance sheet, those questions that you mention—we haven’t gone back to them. now that we’ve tapered, i expect that that’s exactly  what we’ll do in coming meetings. and we’ll do it in an orderly fashion, and we’ll talk about reinvestment and all those things. and we don’t have to make decisions on those yet. but, you know, typically, when we’re doing a new subject like that, we’ll have a series of briefings and discussions. and that’s what we will now begin to do. in terms of the effect of asset purchases on the economy, so, there’s a tremendous amount of research and scholarship on this. and, you know, you can kind of—you can find different people coming out with different views. but i would say, the most mainstream view would be that you’re at the effective lower bound, so how do you affect longer-term rates? there are two ways. one, so you can’t lower rates—let’s say you can’t lower rates any further, hypothetically. so you can give forward guidance. you can say, we’re going to keep the rates low for a period of time, either [for] a specific period, [or] until certain conditions are met. the markets will do the math, and that’ll have an effect on longer-term borrowings even, you know, 10, 30 years out kind of thing. so that’s one thing. the other thing you can do is, you just go buy those securities, buy longer-term securities. that will drive down longer-term rates and hold them lower, and, you know, rates right across the, right across the rate spectrum matter for borrowers. so lower rates encourage more borrowing, encourage more economic activity. people—you can service your debt. you have more free cash flow. you know, it’s not different from what we do at the short end. so that was discussed long before anybody did it. that was—i think milton friedman said that that was what you could do if you were pinned at the lower bound, many, many years ago. so, anyway, that’s how it’s supposed to work. and, you know, it’s quite hard to be precise about these things because, you know, you only have one economy, and you can’t run two different economies right next to each other and do a scientific experiment. but most people  find—most of the findings are that it does support economic activity in the way that you would expect, which is to say, at the margin, more economic activity with lower rates, which is why we do what we do. more accommodative financial conditions lead to more economic activity, over time, with a lag. so i think that’s the main finding i would say on qe. michelle smith. thank you. we’re going to go to paul lamonica at cnn. paul lamonica. chair powell, chair powell, you’ve addressed already questions about the stock purchases that took place from some of the regional fed presidents and, you know, addressing the american people to make sure that they can trust the fed. i was wondering, also, in light of the fact that, you know, we now have questions about your own future, whether or not president biden will nominate you for a second term, what would you say—to the president and to senators that, potentially, you know, will be voting on a renomination—about this, specifically with regards to your future as fed chair for a possible second term? chair powell. so i’m not going to—i won’t have any—i will answer your question, paul, but i’m not going to have any comment whatsoever on the renomination process at all. paul lamonica. fair enough. chair powell. i will say, though, that i have briefed administration officials, and i’ve briefed people on capitol hill in detail about what we did and why we did it, and seeking their feedback, getting their reaction. but, you know, this is—part of my job is—congress has oversight over the fed, and we take that very seriously. so if you’re on our, one of the two committees that has oversight over us, then i’m in regular contact with you, probably. and, you know, when something like this comes up, i’m on the phone. i’m offering to meet with you and explain it to you and answer your questions and identify any concerns people might have. that’s  just part of my job. so i do that. i don’t talk about particular conversations. but you can assume i’ll always do that. and i certainly did it in this case. paul lamonica. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to hannah lang at the american banker. hannah lang. hi. i wanted to ask about the supplementary leverage ratio. is the fed still planning on taking comment on ways to permanently address that, and how concerned are you, ultimately, about banks’ willingness to intermediate in the treasury markets without a permanent fix? chair powell. so i don’t have anything for you on supplemental leverage ratio right now. we are looking at ways to, if there are ways we can address liquidity issues through that channel. we’re also—we also have a—there’s a working group headed by [the] treasury about, over treasury [securities] markets, and what happened in the acute phase of the pandemic, and what structural things may need to be done. so that would be part of that workstream, and i know that there’s a lot going on. i’m not sure when that report will be out. so it’s work under way. that’s one of the many issues that are part of that, along with things like central clearing of treasuries, greater central clearing, and, you know, many other ideas. it’s important that we have a liquid treasury [securities] market. it’s a huge public benefit that we do, and, you know, i think we need to do those things that enable that, you know, while also assuring the safety and soundness of our largest financial institutions, who tend to be the main dealers. so we have to make sure that that’s always a first order of concern as well. hannah lang. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to brian cheung at yahoo finance.  brian cheung. hi, chairman powell. brian cheung, yahoo finance. so, just to expand on the ethics conversation, you talked about how you engage with people on capitol hill and in the administration. you talked about what you’ve done already, but i’m just wondering if you can take a step back and just assess whether or not there was reputational damage as a result of that, either from the public’s view or from the financial community’s view of the federal reserve’s independence. and then, secondly, do you look back on the whole episode and have thoughts on your individual responsibility in preventing something like this from having happened? chair powell you know, i think it’s too soon to say what the reputational damage is. i think, from the very beginning, my reaction was: we need to deal with this straightforwardly, transparently, and forcefully. and that’s what we’re going to do. i mean, it’s, it means everything to me that we do whatever it takes to make sure that nothing like this happens again, and i like to think we’ve made a real good start on that. if you think about it, you cannot execute a trade unless it’s precleared, and then you have to say, “execute.” it’s not even a trade. really, there’s no trading going on. this is for investment and, you know, getting liquidity for life’s expenses. but you then have to wait 45 days to actually execute that sale or purchase. so i think it’s a pretty good system. we’ll always be looking to make it better. so in terms of our independence, you know, look, i think we will address this, and i think we have. and i like to think it’s enough, but it’s going to, you know—we’re just beginning to implement it. we have to write the rules, which we’re doing, you know, as quickly as possible. we need more people. we’re going to have to resource this much more significantly here at the board, and also, we’re going to need appropriate technology, because, you know, the fed has more than—the system has more than 30,000 employees. not all of them, far few of them, will  be covered by this, but the senior officers, who will be covered by this, will, you know, will have to have technology access, and it’s going to have to work efficiently. so there’s a lot of work to do to implement. you know, again, i would just say, this system has been in place for decades. and it was in place when i took over. it was in place for the last, at least the last three or four chairs. and, you know, it was what it was. and, you know, it proved to have weaknesses in it. and part of that was, it wasn’t uniformly enforced across the system. i’m a big believer in the value of the federal reserve system and the reserve banks. but you had 12 different ethics officers at 12 different banks. and you had ethics people here. and, you know, compliance wasn’t, it wasn’t all exactly the same. it was a little bit different and uneven, and also, the rules were— you know, we didn’t imagine the problems that happened. and they may have actually been—i don’t know this—but they may actually have been in compliance with the specifics of our rules. they were clearly not in compliance with the part of our rules that said, don’t do anything that would create that appearance. i mean, that’s clear. this was a bad appearance. so, anyway, what can we do? we are where we are. it happened, and we just have to deal with it forthrightly and transparently and “own” it and step up to this, you know, meet this moment. i’m totally committed to doing that. and, again, if there are better ideas, i’d love to hear them, but i think we have so far made a good start. brian cheung. when you say you spoke with administration officials, did that include the president? chair powell. i’m not going to answer who i spoke to at all. i just, i’m not going to give you any names, so don’t take that as a “yes” or “no.” i’m just not going to start down that road.  michelle smith. okay. thank you. we’re going to go to jeff cox for the last question. jeff cox. yes, thank you. chair, i just want to dig a little bit deeper on employment. we’ve seen what’s been called the great resignation, folks leaving their jobs in record numbers. is there any feeling there that maybe you’ve been accused of “fighting the last war”—that perhaps the labor dynamics have changed in the post-covid environment and that full employment may not look like what it looked like before? chair powell. yes. so, what’s happening is, people are leaving their jobs. they’re quitting their jobs in all-time-high numbers—but, in many cases, going back into employment and getting higher wages. so a lot of the higher wages you’re seeing are for job switchers rather than incumbents. so that’s just, that’s a sign of a really strong labor market, as opposed to people just running off and quitting. there have also been—there are a significant number of retirements, and we’ll just have to see what that means. so, toward the end of the last cycle, which was the longest in our recorded economic history, we did see labor force participation moving up well above what economists estimate was the trend, and part of that was people staying in the labor force or just not retiring at the rates they were expected to retire. so maybe this was just catch-up on that. i am a believer that, over time, you won’t know how far—you won’t know what can happen with labor force participation in advance. you’re just going to have to give it some time, because we saw that over and over again. there are things that we can, where we can say, you know, this is where the limit is. labor force participation is a much more flexible subject for me, and so i do think we need to be  humble about what the limits are of labor force participation. but we expect labor force participation to pick up. we don’t know the pace at which it will do so. so in terms of full employment, as i discussed earlier, i think, at the very beginning of the recovery, the natural thing to do was to look back at labor conditions, labor market conditions in february of 2010, at the end of the longest expansion in our history. there was so much to like about that labor market, a really historically good labor market—never perfect, but a good labor market. we’re in a different world now. this is a—it’s just very different. the pandemic recession was the deepest, and the recovery has been the fastest. and wages didn’t really go down. and, you know, real incomes were more than fully replaced by fiscal policy [support]. all of this is completely unusual. you know, an economy where inflation was driven by services is now inflation where—all the inflation is in goods, which have had negative inflation for a quarter-century. so you ask about full employment. i think we have to—i’m very open to the thought that it’s going to be an empirical question of where it is located, and we’re just going to learn more and more. i mean, one thing we’ll learn, i think, i hope we’ll learn in the next, in the near term is, once the delta variant really does continue to decline, what’s going to happen to employment? are we going to start to see over the winter, you know, significant increases in jobs again? if you look back, the three-, six-, and nine-month average job creation is between 550,000 and 600,000. so if you think of that as a stronger—you don’t have to think back to the million-job months of june and july. you can just think, okay, 550 to 600—if we should get back on that path, then we would be making good progress, and we like to see that, of course. so  we’ll know so much more. and, believe me, we understand. it’s a different world in so many ways. and we’re very open to that. michelle smith. thank you, mr. chair, and thank you all for joining us today. chair powell. thank you.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations.  page 2 federal open market committee board; jeffrey d. walker,2 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board skander van den heuvel, deputy associate director, division of financial stability, board gianni amisano, byron lutz, and raven molloy, assistant directors, division of research and statistics, board; brian j. bonis, giovanni favara, and dan li, assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board penelope a. beattie,3 section chief, office of the secretary, board david h. small, project manager, division of monetary affairs, board randall a. williams, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board michele cavallo, principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board callum jones and arsenios skaperdas, senior economists, division of monetary affairs, board jose acosta, senior communications analyst, division of information technology, board isaiah c. ahn, senior staff assistant, division of monetary affairs, board ron feldman, first vice president, federal reserve bank of minneapolis joseph w. gruber and geoffrey tootell, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of kansas city and boston, respectively anne baum, carlos garriga, paolo a. pesenti, and mark l.j. wright, senior vice presidents, federal reserve banks of new york, st. louis, new york, and minneapolis, respectively satyajit chatterjee and alexander l. wolman, vice presidents, federal reserve banks of philadelphia and richmond, respectively 3 attended tuesday’s session only. edward s. prescott, senior economic and policy advisor, federal reserve bank of cleveland karel mertens, senior economic policy advisor, federal reserve bank of dallas mark spiegel, senior policy advisor, federal reserve bank of san francisco brent meyer, policy advisor and economist, federal reserve bank of atlanta discussion of financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a discussion of global financial markets. sovereign yields rose sharply across many advanced economies with much of the increase concentrated in measures of inflation compensation. in the united states, the five-year measure of inflation compensation based on treasury inflation protected securities (tips) rose by around 45 basis points. far forward measures of inflation compensation also rose, but by modest amounts. in the open market desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants, the median forecast for headline pce inflation in 2021 was revised up notably. median forecasts beyond 2021move up by less, although the average of the probabilities reported by survey respondents placed on higher inflation outcomes at these horizons increased modestly. policy sensitive rates increased across most advanced economies. the central banks of norway and new zealand raised their policy rates early in the period, and policy communications from the bank of england and the bank of canada pointed to the potential for earlier policy firming than had been expected, contributing to the upward movement of global rates. the reserve bank of australia ended its yield target for the april 2024 government bond. that central bank signaled that conditions for raising the policy rate could be met in 2023 but were unlikely to be achieved in the earlier timeframe implied by market pricing. some european central bank communications also suggested that market rates were likely not consistent with the outlook for policy. in the united states, the market-implied path of the federal funds rate rose, implying an earlier date for raising the target range for the federal funds rate and a faster pace of rate hikes than was the case in september. option-implied volatility on short-dated interest rates increased, reportedly reflecting greater uncertainty over  minutes of the meeting of november 2–3, 2021 page 3 the path of the federal funds rate. desk survey responses also indicated expectations for an earlier increase in the target range, although the median respondent’s modal expectation shifted by less than market pricing. the median survey respondent’s modal expectation for the federal funds rate at the end of 2025 was little changed suggesting that investors had not revised their expectations for the cumulative extent of policy firming over the next four years. expectations for a reduction in the pace of net asset purchases coalesced further, and most survey respondents expected the tapering of asset purchases to start with the november purchase schedule with monthly reductions of $10 billion and $5 billion in treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs), respectively. over the intermeeting period, u.s. equity indexes rose and the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—fell to post-pandemic lows. continued strong earnings underpinned the rise in equity prices, with firms posting profits near historical highs. despite signs of robust risk appetite, market participants continued to note prominent risks to the outlook, including ongoing challenges in the chinese property sector. turning to desk operations, the manager noted that, should the committee decide to announce a reduction in the pace of net asset purchases at this meeting, the desk would issue a monthly purchase schedule on november 12 reflecting this change. the mid-december purchase schedule, to be released just before the next fomc meeting, would reflect additional reductions of the same size. treasury securities and agency mbs would continue to be purchased across sectors and coupons consistent with current practice. if similar reductions in the net purchase pace were implemented in subsequent months, the system open market account (soma) portfolio would peak around next june at about $8.5 trillion. in terms of composition, treasury securities and agency mbs would constitute roughly 70 percent and 30 percent of the soma portfolio, respectively—roughly in line with the shares of treasury securities and agency mbs in the total stock of these securities outstanding—and the soma portfolio would be more heavily weighted toward treasury securities than after the conclusion of the third large-scale asset purchase program (lsap 3) following the global financial crisis. the maturity composition of soma treasury coupon holdings would also be fairly close to that of the outstanding universe of treasury securities, and the weighted average maturity would be shorter than after lsap 3. turning to money market developments, the manager noted that the transition away from libor (london interbank offered rate) had gained momentum with a pick-up in the interdealer trading volume of secured overnight financing rate (sofr) derivatives; that said, much remained to be done to complete the libor transition. market participants were attentive to some temporary downward pressure on the sofr over the period. this softness appeared to be the result of technical factors and was observed primarily in centrally cleared repurchase agreement markets. the federal reserve’s administered rates—the interest on reserve balances rate and the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) rate—continued to support effective interest rate control and, outside of month- and quarter-end, the federal funds rate remained stable over the period. regarding the debt ceiling, the short-term resolution reached in october increased the debt limit by $480 billion. market participants’ estimates of the new date when the treasury would exhaust its extraordinary measures and cash balance were wide-ranging but some estimates suggested the date might be as early as middecember. most market participants anticipated that a resolution to the debt ceiling would again be reached without a delayed payment on maturing treasury securities although uncertainty about the debt ceiling resolution remained a source of concern in financial markets. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the november 2–3 meeting suggested that u.s. real gdp growth had slowed markedly in the third quarter after the first half’s rapid pace. labor market conditions continued to improve in september, though employment growth was slower than in recent months. consumer price inflation in september—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the pce price index—was elevated. growth in total nonfarm payroll employment slowed further in september, held down by a decline in state and local government employment. as of september, total payroll employment had retraced three-fourths of the losses seen at the onset of the pandemic. the unemployment rate declined from 5.2 percent in august to  page 4 federal open market committee 4.8 percent in september; the unemployment rates for african americans and hispanics also declined over this period, but both rates remained well above the national average. the labor force participation rate edged lower in september, and the employment-to-population ratio moved up. private-sector job openings, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, stepped down in august but remained well above pre-pandemic levels. initial claims for regular state unemployment insurance moved lower through late october and were approaching the levels seen before the pandemic. recent weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by the board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp were especially volatile but, on balance, appeared consistent with a pickup in the pace of private employment gains relative to september. the employment cost index of hourly compensation in the private sector rose 4.1 percent over the 12 months ending in september; this gain was noticeably larger than the index’s year-earlier 12-month change and was the fastest 12-month change since 2001. total pce price inflation was 4.4 percent over the 12 months ending in september, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 3.6 percent over the same period. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 2.3 percent in september. in the third quarter of 2021, the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, was little changed relative to the second quarter and remained at its highest level since 2014. real pce posted a modest increase in the third quarter after having risen sharply over the first half of the year. the third-quarter slowdown appeared to reflect a combination of factors, including the waning effect of previous fiscal stimulus measures, the surge in covid-19 cases over the summer, and a plunge in motor vehicle purchases as extremely low dealer inventories constrained sales. residential investment dropped further in the third quarter; although demand for housing was strong, shortages of construction supplies as well as tight land and labor markets restrained residential construction activity. growth in business fixed investment slowed sharply in the third quarter, as supply bottlenecks—particularly for motor vehicles—weighed on business equipment spending and a limited availability of construction materials held back spending on nonresidential structures. manufacturing output declined in september. motor vehicle output stepped down further as semiconductor shortages continued to restrain production; in addition, hurricane ida resulted in prolonged plant outages in the petrochemical, refining, and plastic resins industries. total real government purchases posted a small increase in the third quarter after having declined in the second quarter. although real state and local purchases increased, the gain was largely offset by declines in both federal defense and nondefense purchases. the u.s. international trade deficit widened in august, reflecting a moderate pace of import growth against a subdued pace of export growth. real import growth was driven by increases in consumer goods and industrial supplies. real export growth was held back by declines in capital goods, agricultural products, and automotive products. bottlenecks in the global semiconductor industry continued to weigh on exports and imports of automotive products, and shipping congestion continued to restrain trade overall. advance estimates for september suggested that goods imports rose while goods exports fell, pointing to a further widening of the trade deficit. the bureau of economic analysis estimated that a drop in net exports subtracted substantially from real gdp growth in the third quarter. foreign gdp growth slowed modestly in the third quarter, as supply chain disruptions and the resurgence of covid-19 weighed on production, particularly in china and other emerging market economies (emes). in several emes, public health restrictions were reinstated, resulting in factory closures. moreover, chinese manufacturing output was curtailed by the rationing of electricity amid a coal shortage resulting in part from policies to lower carbon emissions. in contrast to emes, advanced foreign economies (afes) generally continued to recover at a solid pace in the third quarter, as the boost from the further reopening of high-contact services activity was only partially offset by the drag from bottlenecks, the spread of the virus, and, in some places, labor shortages. twelve-month rates of inflation abroad continued to rise, reflecting further increases in energy prices, persistent pressures from supply bottlenecks, and past exchange rate depreciation in some emes. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, an increase in perceived inflation risks and an associated upward revision in the market-implied path of the federal funds rate contributed to increases in treasury yields. long-term sovereign yields in afes also increased notably. despite  minutes of the meeting of november 2–3, 2021 page 5 these pressures, broad domestic equity indexes increased, on net, supported by strong earnings reports. spreads of corporate bonds were little changed overall. short-term funding markets were stable, while participation in the on rrp facility increased further, to its highest level since the facility was put in place. market-based financing conditions were accommodative, and bank lending standards eased for most loan categories. market participants’ views on the expected path for the federal funds rate over the next few years—implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes—rose substantially since the september fomc meeting, apparently in response to perceived risks of higher inflation. those risks also contributed to increases in treasury yields, with 2-, 5-, and 10-year yields rising notably on net. broad equity indexes increased, on net, over the intermeeting period. perceptions of increased risks related to inflation were more than offset by a short-term resolution of the debt ceiling, a decrease in perceived risks related to the effect of the pandemic on the pace of the economic recovery, and stronger-than-expected thirdquarter earnings. the vix declined notably to near prepandemic levels. spreads on corporate bonds were little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period and remained at low levels. spreads of municipal bonds narrowed slightly. short-term funding markets were stable over the intermeeting period. the effective federal funds rate remained at 8 basis points throughout the period except on month-ends, while the sofr averaged 5 basis points. consistent with relatively low treasury bill supply and abundant liquidity, participation in on rrp operations increased from an average of $1.1 trillion over the previous intermeeting period to $1.4 trillion, reaching a new high of $1.6 trillion on the september quarter-end. in major foreign markets, sovereign yields rose notably over the intermeeting period, as did inflation compensation and market-implied measures of expected policy rates, amid sharp further increases in energy prices, concerns about higher inflation, and communications by some foreign central banks that were seen as signaling a faster removal of monetary policy accommodation. market concerns about risks of a downturn in the chinese real estate sector remained elevated, and inflows into funds investing in china slowed, but the effects on broader financial markets were limited. on balance, major foreign equity indexes increased moderately, and the broad dollar appreciated a touch. in domestic credit markets, financing conditions faced by nonfinancial firms in capital markets remained highly accommodative over the intermeeting period. gross corporate bond issuance stayed strong in september and october. gross leveraged loan issuance decreased slightly in september after its strong growth in august. equity raised through traditional initial public offerings remained robust in september and october, while equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies remained at the subdued levels seen in recent months. commercial and industrial (c&i) loans declined notably in the third quarter amid ongoing forgiveness of paycheck protection program loans. in the october senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported easing standards and terms, on net, for c&i loans over the third quarter. banks also reported that demand for c&i loans was about unchanged over the third quarter after strengthening for the previous two quarters; on balance, loan demand was still weaker than before the pandemic. the credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations remained strong. the volume of credit rating upgrades for speculative-grade nonfinancial corporate bonds outpaced downgrades in september and october. trailing default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans decreased from already low levels, while market indicators of future expected default rates remained benign. in the municipal bond market, financing conditions remained accommodative despite a modest increase in yields. issuance of municipal debt was strong in september and october, and indicators of the credit quality of municipal debt remained healthy. survey-based indicators suggested that small business owners became less pessimistic about their financial prospects, with the exception of owners in the educational services sector, for whom expectations deteriorated slightly. while loan originations to small businesses fell a bit, the results from the october sloos suggested that the decline appeared to reflect weak demand, particularly for small and very small firms. commercial real estate loan balances on banks’ books strengthened, and, in the october sloos, banks reported an easing of standards on such loans over the third quarter. issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) remained robust, supported by spreads of agency cmbs generally at or below pre-pandemic levels. delinquency rates on mortgages in cmbs pools continued to fall but remained elevated for cmbs backed by hotel and retail properties.  page 6 federal open market committee in the residential mortgage market, financing conditions remained accommodative, particularly for borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. in the october sloos, banks reported easing lending standards for almost all major mortgage categories. mortgage rates increased modestly over the intermeeting period but did not rise as much as the 10-year treasury yield. indicators of mortgage originations for home purchases and refinancing remained fairly robust. the share of mortgages in forbearance continued to decline through october, and the rate of new transitions into delinquency stayed low by historical standards. financing conditions for consumer credit remained accommodative for most borrowers, especially those with stronger credit scores. lending standards for nonprime consumers in the credit card market continued to ease but remained slightly tighter than pre-pandemic levels. in the october sloos, banks reported easier standards for credit cards and auto loans over the third quarter. while demand for credit cards strengthened, auto loan growth slowed in response to low dealer inventories and a weakening of auto sales. the staff provided an update on indicators related to the stability of the financial system. the staff noted that asset valuations remained generally high relative to historical norms. in particular, bond and leveraged loan spreads remained narrow, while equity prices continued to increase, supported by strong earnings expectations, still-low treasury yields, and high risk appetite. house prices rose rapidly, outpacing rents, but the staff did not see signs of loose mortgage underwriting standards or excessive mortgage credit growth that could potentially amplify a shock arising from falling house prices. for households, the level of consumer debt was largely unchanged on an inflation-adjusted basis, while delinquencies returned to pre-pandemic levels or below. for nonfinancial businesses, measures of leverage in the corporate sector fell over the second quarter and largely returned to pre-pandemic levels; in addition, the level of corporate debt became more sustainable as earnings increased and rates remained low. in the financial sector, the staff noted that banks were strongly capitalized, with high levels of stable funding and high-quality liquid assets. the mean level of gross hedge fund leverage was noteworthy and its distribution was skewed, with particularly high leverage among funds in the top decile. vulnerabilities associated with funding risks remained at money funds and other mutual funds. in addition, funding risks were an emerging concern at entities issuing stablecoins, because they appeared to have structural maturity and liquidity transformation vulnerabilities similar to those for money funds but with considerably less transparency and an underdeveloped regulatory framework. the staff noted that the president’s working group on financial markets was engaged in interagency work to address these risks. staff economic outlook the projection for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the november fomc meeting was slightly weaker than the september projection. incoming data suggested that the resolution of supply constraints was starting later and would be more gradual than previously assumed; even so, real gdp was expected to post a sizable gain over 2021 as a whole. in 2022, real gdp growth was expected to remain close to its 2021 pace, supported by the continued reopening of the economy and the resolution of supply constraints in most sectors. with the boost from these factors fading, real gdp growth was projected to step down noticeably in 2023 and to be close to potential output growth in 2023 and 2024. however, the level of real gdp was expected to remain well above potential throughout the projection period, and the unemployment rate was expected to decline to historically low levels. the staff’s near-term outlook for inflation was revised up, as consumer food and energy prices had risen faster than expected and production bottlenecks and recent wage gains were seen as putting somewhat greater upward pressure on prices than had been anticipated. as a result, the 12-month change in pce prices was projected to move up further relative to september’s pace and to end the year well above 2 percent. over the following two years, the boost to consumer prices caused by supply issues was expected to partly reverse, and resource utilization was projected to tighten further. pce price inflation was therefore expected to step down to 2 percent in 2022 and to 1.9 percent in 2023 before edging back up to 2 percent in 2024. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks around the inflation projection were skewed to the upside. in particular, the possibility of another sizable wave of covid-19 cases in the winter was seen as an important source of downside risk to activity, while the possibility of more severe and persistent supply issues was viewed as an additional downside risk to activity and as an upside risk to inflation. participants’ views on current economic conditions and the economic outlook in their discussion of current conditions, participants noted that, with progress on vaccinations and strong  minutes of the meeting of november 2–3, 2021 page 7 policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months, but the summer’s rise in covid-19 cases had slowed their recovery. inflation was elevated, largely reflecting factors that were expected to be transitory. supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy had contributed to sizable price increases in some sectors. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants noted that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints were expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation, but risks to the economic outlook remained. participants observed that growth in economic activity had slowed in the third quarter to a rate significantly below the robust pace seen in the first half of the year. the spread of the delta variant had contributed to the slowdown in growth in the third quarter by damping household and business spending, holding down labor supply, and intensifying supply chain disruptions. participants noted that the underlying conditions supporting growth in demand remained strong and that, as the number of covid-19 cases remained well below the summer’s levels, growth in economic activity would likely show a pickup in the fourth quarter. they further foresaw robust growth in 2022, supported by progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints. in their discussion of the household sector, participants remarked that demand for most consumer goods had remained strong. they noted that businesses had generally recorded robust sales despite labor shortages and other supply disruptions that had prevented them from fully meeting higher demand for their products. participants interpreted available data as suggesting that the spread of the delta variant had slowed the shift of consumer demand toward purchases of services and away from spending on goods, stretching out the full reopening of the economy and intensifying supply and demand imbalances. participants observed that households had strong balance sheets and that consumer spending would also be supported by accommodative financial conditions. a number of participants noted that there was likely to be a drag on household spending as previous fiscal support faded, or that fiscal policy might provide some support to aggregate demand if the congress authorized major new federal appropriations. participants remarked that supply chain challenges and limited labor availability continued to be major constraints on manufacturing activity and the business sector more broadly. bottleneck pressures faced by businesses were accompanied by global supply chain disruptions associated with major backlogs in shipments and transportation as well as surging demand for a variety of goods, shortages of labor and other inputs, increases in costs of production, and depleted inventory levels in key sectors. many business contacts had experienced a worsening of supply chain problems, and participants reported that firms had responded to these challenges by taking a variety of actions, including raising prices, turning away customers, restructuring supply chains, and using alternative, but higher-cost, shipping options. participants judged that supply constraints would likely continue for longer than they had previously expected. participants noted that data received over the intermeeting period indicated that labor market conditions had continued to improve. although the september increase in payrolls had been moderate compared with recent months, the unemployment rate had declined further and previous months’ job growth had been revised up. participants observed that september’s rise in payrolls had been held down by a shortage of workers, in part reflecting the ongoing effect of the virus on labor supply decisions. with covid-19 cases expected to remain below the summer’s levels, participants anticipated better payroll numbers in the months ahead. participants indicated that district contacts continued to report difficulties in finding and retaining workers and that, in addition to offering higher wages, businesses were turning to increased use of automation. while recognizing that labor market conditions varied significantly across the country, some participants cited a number of signs that the u.s. labor market was very tight: these included data on quits, job availability, and stronger rates of nominal wage growth reflected in the recent rise in the employment cost index, as well as the readings provided by the federal reserve bank of kansas city’s labor market conditions indicators. a number of participants observed that the labor force participation rate remained well below the level reached before the pandemic. several participants judged that labor force participation would be structurally lower than in the past, and a few of these participants cited the high level of retirements recorded since the start of the pandemic. several other participants suggested that labor supply was currently being depressed by pandemic-related factors such as disruptions related to caregiving ar-  page 8 federal open market committee rangements and noted that the importance of such factors would likely diminish as economic and public health conditions improved further. participants generally saw the current elevated level of inflation as largely reflecting factors that were likely to be transitory but judged that inflation pressures could take longer to subside than they had previously assessed. they remarked that the delta wave had intensified the impediments to supply chains and had helped sustain the high level of goods demand, adding to the upward pressure on prices. participants also observed that increases in energy prices, stronger rates of nominal wage growth, and higher housing rental costs had been forces adding to inflation. some participants highlighted the fact that price increases had become more widespread. although participants expected significant inflation pressures to last for longer than they previously expected, they generally continued to anticipate that the inflation rate would diminish significantly during 2022 as supply and demand imbalances abated. nonetheless, they indicated that their uncertainty regarding this assessment had increased. many participants pointed to considerations that might suggest that elevated inflation could prove more persistent. these participants noted that average inflation already exceeded 2 percent when measured on a multiyear basis and cited a number of factors—such as businesses’ enhanced scope to pass on higher costs to their customers, the possibility that nominal wage growth had become more sensitive to labor market pressures, or accommodative financial conditions—that might result in inflation continuing at elevated levels. some other participants, however, remarked that although inflationary pressures were lasting longer than anticipated, those pressures continued to reflect the same pandemic-related imbalances and would likely abate when supply constraints eased. these participants also noted that the most sizable price increases may have already occurred, that there was as yet little evidence of a change in inflation dynamics—such as the development of a wage–price spiral—that would tend to prolong elevated levels of inflation, and that forces already in motion would likely bring inflation down toward 2 percent over the medium term. participants were attentive to the sizable increase in the cost of living that had taken place this year and the associated burden on u.s. households, particularly those who had limited scope to pay higher prices for essential goods and services. in their comments on inflation expectations, a number of participants discussed the risk that, in light of recent elevated levels of inflation, the public’s longer-term expectations of inflation might increase to a level above that consistent with the committee’s longer-run inflation objective; such a development could make it harder for the committee to achieve 2 percent inflation over the longer run. a couple of participants pointed to increases in survey- and market-based indicators of expected inflation—including the notable rise in the fiveyear tips-based measure of inflation compensation—as possible signs that inflation expectations were becoming less well anchored. several other participants, however, remarked that measures of near- and medium-term inflation expectations typically had been sensitive to movements in realized inflation and that they had not exhibited greater sensitivity recently. they additionally pointed out that indicators of longer-term inflation expectations—including the five-year, five-year-forward measure of inflation compensation—continued to display less sensitivity to realized inflation and remained well anchored at levels consistent with the committee’s longer-run 2 percent goal. participants observed that uncertainty about the economic outlook remained high. they particularly stressed uncertainties associated with the labor market, including the evolution of labor force participation, and with the length of time required to resolve the supply chain situation. participants cited upside risks to inflation, including those associated with strong demand for goods and a tight labor market. upside risks to economic activity included a potential near-term boost to aggregate demand that could arise from the drawing down of the substantial savings accumulated by households since the beginning of the pandemic. a few participants mentioned an upsurge in covid-19 cases during the coming winter or an emergence of new virus strains as possibilities that, if they were realized, would damp economic activity and intensify price pressures. a number of participants commented on issues related to financial stability. a couple of participants noted factors supporting the strength and resilience of the u.s. financial system, including the solid capital and liquidity conditions of banks and the fact that underwriting standards for residential mortgages had not eased substantially in an environment of rising house prices. a few participants emphasized the importance of maintaining strong bank capital positions, particularly at the largest banks. a few participants also cited a number of factors representing potential vulnerabilities to the financial system: these included elevated asset valuations prevailing widely across asset classes, the growing exposure of  minutes of the meeting of november 2–3, 2021 page 9 banks to nonbank financial firms, and the risk of a sudden reduction in the liquidity of collateral used at central counterparty clearing and settlement systems. in the area of cybersecurity, a few participants stressed the importance of greater preparedness against a cyberattack that could disrupt the nation’s payments process and financial system. several participants commented on the financial stability risks—including those relating to maturity and liquidity transformation—associated with stablecoins and on the need for regulators to address these risks. a few participants noted the importance of developing systematic monitoring of the climate-related risks facing the financial system. in their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants agreed that the economy had made substantial further progress toward the committee’s goals since december 2020, when the committee adopted its guidance regarding asset purchases. the unemployment rate had declined to 4.8 percent in september—about 2 percentage points lower than the level last december—and job openings and other indicators also were pointing to widespread strength in labor demand, consistent with a broad improvement in labor market conditions. consequently, participants assessed that the criterion of substantial further progress had been met with regard to the committee’s maximum employment goal. in addition, participants generally judged that the committee’s criterion of substantial further progress had clearly been more than met with respect to inflation. against this backdrop, all participants judged that, consistent with the committee’s previous policy communications, it would be appropriate to announce at this meeting a reduction in the pace of net asset purchases. participants generally supported the plan to implement reductions in the pace of net purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs by $10 billion and $5 billion per month, respectively, over the upcoming intermeeting period and judged that similar reductions in the pace would likely be appropriate in each subsequent month. some participants preferred a somewhat faster pace of reductions that would result in an earlier conclusion to net purchases. participants noted that beginning to scale back the pace of net asset purchases was not intended to convey any direct signal regarding adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate. they highlighted the more stringent criteria for raising the target range, compared with the criteria that applied to beginning to reduce the pace of asset purchases. participants stressed that maintaining flexibility to implement appropriate policy adjustments on the basis of risk- management considerations should be a guiding principle in conducting policy in the current highly uncertain environment. some participants suggested that reducing the pace of net asset purchases by more than $15 billion each month could be warranted so that the committee would be in a better position to make adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, particularly in light of inflation pressures. various participants noted that the committee should be prepared to adjust the pace of asset purchases and raise the target range for the federal funds rate sooner than participants currently anticipated if inflation continued to run higher than levels consistent with the committee’s objectives. at the same time, because of the continuing considerable uncertainty about developments in supply chains, production logistics, and the course of the virus, a number of participants stressed that a patient attitude toward incoming data remained appropriate to allow for careful evaluation of evolving supply chain developments and their implications for the labor market and inflation. that said, participants noted that the committee would not hesitate to take appropriate actions to address inflation pressures that posed risks to its longer-run price stability and employment objectives. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. they noted that the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but that the summer’s rise in covid-19 cases had slowed their recovery. inflation was elevated, largely reflecting factors that were expected to be transitory. they remarked that supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy had contributed to sizable price increases in some sectors. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members also acknowledged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints were expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation, but risks to the economic outlook remained. members agreed that the postmeeting statement should acknowledge that the sectors of the economy most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months, but that the summer’s rise in covid-19 cases had slowed their recovery. they also concurred that it  page 10 federal open market committee would be appropriate to convey less certainty about the path of inflation by noting that the factors driving elevated inflation “are expected to be transitory.” in order to provide additional information about these factors, members further decided that the postmeeting statement would say that “supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have contributed to sizable price increases in some sectors.” members also agreed to include a sentence stating that “progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints are expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation.” members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. all members reaffirmed that, in accordance with the committee’s goals to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, and with inflation having run persistently below this longerrun goal, they would aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. members expected to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until those outcomes were achieved. in their discussion of monetary policy in the period ahead, members agreed that, in light of the substantial further progress the economy had made toward the committee’s goals since last december, the committee should begin to slow the pace of its asset purchases at this meeting. consistent with this approach, the committee decided to start reducing the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $10 billion for treasury securities and $5 billion for agency mbs. consequently, the committee agreed that, beginning with the purchase schedule published in mid-november, it would increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $70 billion per month rather than $80 billion per month and would increase its holdings of agency mbs by at least $35 billion per month, rather than $40 billion per month. because the open market desk would be releasing two monthly purchase schedules between the november and december fomc meetings, the committee further decided to add to the postmeeting statement an indication that, beginning in december, the committee would increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $60 billion per month and of agency mbs by at least $30 billion per month. members decided the postmeeting statement should state that the committee judged that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases would likely be appropriate in subsequent months, implying that increases in securities holdings would cease by the middle of next year under the committee’s outlook. members also noted that the committee was prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook and agreed that the postmeeting statement should say so. members agreed that the addition of this language would acknowledge the importance of maintaining flexibility to adjust the stance of policy as appropriate in response to changes in the committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation. members agreed that the statement should continue to note that the committee’s ongoing asset purchases helped foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions. additionally, members decided to introduce into the postmeeting statement a reference to the federal reserve’s “holdings of securities” in the sentence describing the economic effects of asset purchases. this addition would make clear that, even after net increases in the soma portfolio ceased, the federal reserve’s elevated securities holdings would continue to support accommodative financial conditions. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. they also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective november 4, 2021, the federal open market committee directs the desk to:  undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent.  complete the increase in system open market account (soma) holdings of  minutes of the meeting of november 2–3, 2021 page 11 treasury securities by $80 billion and of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) by $40 billion, as indicated in the monthly purchase plans released in mid-october.  increase the soma holdings of treasury securities by $70 billion and of agency mbs by $35 billion, during the monthly purchase period beginning in mid-november.  increase the soma holdings of treasury securities by $60 billion and of agency mbs by $30 billion, during the monthly purchase period beginning in mid-december.  increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities.  conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs.  allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months, but the summer’s rise in covid-19 cases has slowed their recovery. inflation is elevated, largely reflecting factors that are expected to be transitory. supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have contributed to sizable price increases in some sectors. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints are expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation. risks to the economic outlook remain. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with inflation having run persistently below this longer-run goal, the committee will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time and longerterm inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. the committee expects to maintain an accommodative stance of monetary policy until these outcomes are achieved. the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. in light of the substantial further progress the economy has made toward the committee’s goals since last december, the committee decided to begin reducing the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $10 billion for treasury securities and $5 billion for agency mortgagebacked securities. beginning later this month, the committee will increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $70 billion per  page 12 federal open market committee month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $35 billion per month. beginning in december, the committee will increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $60 billion per month and of agency mortgagebacked securities by at least $30 billion per month. the committee judges that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, but it is prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. the federal reserve’s ongoing purchases and holdings of securities will continue to foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, thomas i. barkin, raphael w. bostic, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, mary c. daly, charles l. evans, randal k. quarles, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective november 4, 2021. the board also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective november 4, 2021. following these actions, the chair commented on the critical importance of maintaining the public’s trust and confidence in the federal reserve as an institution. in this regard, the chair noted the recent announcement of changes in the rules regarding financial investments and transactions for federal reserve officials and indicated that efforts were under way to implement these new rules expeditiously. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, december 14– 15, 2021. the meeting adjourned at 10:35 a.m. on november 3, 2021. notation vote by notation vote completed on october 12, 2021, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on september 21–22, 2021.  james a. clouse secretary 
ce december 15, 2021 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. today, in support of these goals, the federal open market committee kept interest rates near zero and updated its assessment of the progress that the economy has made toward the criteria specified in the committee’s forward guidance for interest rates. in addition, in light of the strengthening labor market and elevated inflation pressures, we decided to speed up the reductions in our asset purchases. as i will explain, economic developments and changes in the outlook warrant this evolution of monetary policy, which will continue to provide appropriate support for the economy. economic activity is on track to expand at a robust pace this year, reflecting progress on vaccinations and the reopening of the economy. aggregate demand remains very strong, buoyed by fiscal and monetary policy support and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. the rise in covid cases in recent weeks, along with the emergence of the omicron variant, pose[s] risks to the outlook. notwithstanding the effects of the virus and supply constraints, fomc participants continue to foresee rapid growth. as shown in our summary of economic projections (sep), the median projection for real gdp growth stands at 5.5 percent this year and 4 percent next year. amid improving labor market conditions and very strong demand for workers, the economy has been making rapid progress toward maximum employment. job gains have been solid in recent months, averaging 378,000 per month over the last three months. the unemployment rate has declined substantially—falling 6/10 of a percentage point since our last  meeting and reaching 4.2 percent in november. the recent improvements in labor market conditions have narrowed the differences in employment across groups, especially for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution, as well as for african americans and hispanics. labor force participation showed a welcome rise in november—but remains subdued, in part reflecting the aging of the population and retirements. in addition, some who otherwise would be seeking work report that they are out of the labor force because of factors related to the pandemic, including caregiving needs and ongoing concerns about the virus. at the same time, employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at their fastest pace in many years. how long the labor shortages will persist is unclear, particularly if additional waves of the virus occur. looking ahead, fomc participants project the labor market to continue to improve, with the median projection for the unemployment rate declining to 3.5 percent by the end of the year. compared with the projections made in september, participants have revised their unemployment rate projections noticeably lower for this year and next. supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and [to] the reopening of the economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. in particular, bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond to higher demand in the near term. these problems have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, exacerbated by waves of the virus. as a result, overall inflation is running well above our 2 percent longer-run goal and will likely continue to do so well into next year. while the drivers of higher inflation have been predominantly connected to the dislocations caused by the pandemic, price increases have now spread to a broader range of goods and services. wages have also risen briskly, but, thus far, wage growth has not been a major contributor to the elevated levels of inflation. we are attentive to the risks that persistent real wage growth in excess of productivity [growth] could put  upward pressure on inflation. like most forecasters, we continue to expect inflation to decline to levels closer to our 2 percent longer-run goal by the end of next year. the median inflation projection of fomc participants falls from 5.3 percent this year to 2.6 percent next year; this trajectory is notably higher than projected in september. we understand that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are committed to our price-stability goal. we will use our tools both to support the economy and a strong labor market and to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched. we will be watching carefully to see whether the economy is evolving in line with expectations. the fed’s monetary policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. in support of these goals, the committee reaffirmed the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate. we also updated our assessment of the progress the economy has made toward the criteria specified in our forward guidance for the federal funds rate. with inflation having exceeded 2 percent for some time, the committee expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment. all fomc participants forecast that this remaining test will be met next year. the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 0.9 percent at the end of 2022, about ½ percentage point higher than projected in september. participants expect a gradual pace of policy firming, with the level of the federal funds rate generally near estimates of its longer-run level by the end of 2024. of course, these projections do not represent a  committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. at today’s meeting, the committee also decided to double the pace of reductions in its asset purchases. beginning in mid-january, we will reduce the monthly pace of our net asset purchases by $20 billion for treasury securities and $10 billion for agency mortgage-backed securities. if the economy evolves broadly as expected, similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, implying that increases in our securities holdings would cease by mid-march—a few months sooner than we anticipated in early november. we are phasing out our purchases more rapidly because, with elevated inflation pressures and a rapidly strengthening labor market, the economy no longer needs increasing amounts of policy support. in addition, a quicker conclusion of our asset purchases will better position policy to address the full range of plausible economic outcomes. we remain prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. and, even after our balance sheet stops expanding, our holdings of securities will continue to foster accommodative financial conditions. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to complete the recovery in employment and achieve our price- stability goal. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. mr. chair, we’ll go to rachel from the washington post. rachel siegel. thank you very much, michelle. and thank you, chair powell, for taking our questions. the latest fomc materials say that the fomc thinks it will be appropriate  to keep rates near zero until labor market conditions reach levels consistent with maximum employment. and there are also three rate hikes penciled in the projections for next year. in order to set up those hikes, what will maximum employment have to look like? when will you know that that threshold has been met? and how will that be communicated? thank you. chair powell. so maximum employment, if you look at our statement on longer- run goals and monetary policy strategy, maximum employment is something that we look at a broad range of indicators. and those would include, of course, things like the unemployment rate, the labor force participation rate, job openings, wages, flows in and out of the labor force in various parts of the labor force. we’d also tend to look broadly and inclusively at different demographic groups and not just at the headline and aggregate numbers. so that’s a—that’s a judgment for the committee to make. the committee will make a judgment that we’ve achieved labor market conditions consistent with maximum employment when it makes that—it is, admittedly, a judgment call because it’s a range of factors. unlike inflation, where we have one number that sort of dominates, it’s a broad range of things. so, as i mentioned in my opening remarks, in my view, we are making rapid progress toward maximum employment. and you see that, of course, in some of the factors that i mentioned. michelle smith. great, thank you. steve at cnbc. steve liesman. all right. thank you, mr. chairman. my question is: if—it’s often said that monetary policy has long and variable lags. how does continuing to buy assets now, even though it’s at a slower pace, address the current inflation problem? won’t the impact of today’s changes not really have any impact for six months or a year down the road on the current inflation problem? and aren’t you actually lengthening that time by continuing to buy assets  such that it could be not until the long and variable lag after you end purchases sometime in march that you’ll start to have any impact on the inflation problem? chair powell. so, on the first part of your question, which is, “why not stop purchasing now?,” i would just say this: we’ve learned that, in dealing with balance sheet issues, we’ve learned that it’s best to take a careful sort of methodical approach to make adjustments. markets can be sensitive to it. and we thought that this was—this was a doubling of the speed. we’re basically two meetings away now from finishing the taper. and we thought that was the appropriate way to go. so we announced it, and that’s what will happen. you know, the question of long and variable lags is, is an interesting one. that’s, that’s milton friedman’s famous statement. and i do think that in this world, where everything is— where the global financial markets are connected together, financial conditions can change very quickly. and my own sense is that they get into—financial conditions affect the economy fairly rapidly, longer than the traditional thought of, you know, a year or 18 months. shorter than that, rather. but in addition, when we communicate about what we’re going to do, the markets move immediately [in response] to that. so financial conditions are changing to reflect, you know, the forecasts that we made and basically, which was, i think, fairly in line with what markets were expecting. but financial conditions don’t wait to change until, until things actually happen. they, they change on the expectation of things happening. so i don’t think it’s a question of having to wait. steve liesman. can i just follow up? thinking about having to wait, is it still the policy, or the position, of the committee that you will not raise rates until the taper is complete? thank you.  chair powell. yes. the sense of that, of course, being that buying assets is adding accommodation and raising rates is removing accommodation. since we’re two meetings away from completing the taper, assuming things go as, as expected, i think if we wanted to lift off before then, then, then what we—you would stop the taper potentially sooner. but it’s not something i expect to happen. but i do—i do not think it would be appropriate, and we—and we don’t find ourselves in a situation where we—where we might have to raise rates while we’re still purchasing assets. michelle smith. okay, let’s go to colby at the ft. colby smith. thank you, michelle. chair powell, i’m curious exactly how much distance you think there should be between the end of the taper and the first interest rate increase. back in 2014, the guidance was—that was given was for the fed funds rate to remain at the target level for a considerable time after the end of the asset purchase program. is that an approach you support now? or does the current economic situation warrant something a bit different? thank you. chair powell. so we, we haven’t made any decision of that nature. and so, no, i wouldn’t say that’s our position at all. we really haven’t taken a position on that. i will say that we did talk today–we had our first discussion about the balance sheet, for example. and we went through the way—the sequence of events regarding the runoff and that sort of thing with the balance sheet, last time. and i think people thought that was an interesting discussion. they thought that it was informative, but people pointed out that this is a significantly different economic situation that we have at the current time, and that those—the differences that we see now would tend to influence how we think about the balance sheet. and the same thing would be true about raising rates. i don’t—i don’t foresee that there would be that kind of very  extended wait at this time. the economy is so much stronger. i was here at the fed when we lifted off the last time. and the economy is so much stronger now, so much closer to full employment. inflation is running well above target, and growth is well above potential. there wouldn’t be the need for that kind of long delay. having said that, i—you know, we’ll make this decision in coming meetings, and it’s not—it’s not a decision that the committee has really focused on yet. michelle smith. let’s go to nick at the wall street journal. nick timiraos. thank you, nick timiraos at the wall street journal. chair powell, in march you answered a question about maximum employment like this: you said 4 percent would be a nice unemployment rate to get to, but it’ll take more than that to get to maximum employment. more recently, you have hinted at a possible distinction between the level of maximum employment that’s achievable in the short run versus in the long run. has your view of the level of maximum employment changed this year? and if so, how? and how close is the economy right now to your judgment of the short-run level of maximum employment? thank you. chair powell. right. so the—you know, the thing is, we’re not going back to the same economy we had in february of 2020. and i think early on, that was—the sense was that that’s where we were headed. the post-pandemic labor market, and the economy in general, will be different. and the maximum level of employment that’s consistent with price stability evolves over time within a—within a business cycle and over a longer period, in part reflecting [the] evolution of the factors that affect labor supply, including those related to the pandemic. so i would say: look, we’re, we’re at 4.2 percent now and it’s been—the unemployment rate has been dropping very quickly. so we’re already in the vicinity of 4 percent.  the way in which—the important metric that has been disappointing really has been labor force participation, of course, where we had widely thought—i had certainly thought— that, last fall, as unemployment insurance ran off, as vaccinations increased, [and] as schools reopened, that we would see a significant surge, if you will, or at least a surge, in labor force participation. so we’ve begun to see some improvement. we certainly welcome the 2/10 improvement that we got in the november report. but i do think that it’s—it feels likely now that the return to higher participation is going to take longer. and, in fact, that’s, that’s been the pattern in past cycles—that labor force participation has tended to recover in the wake of a strong recovery in unemployment, which is what we’re getting right now. so you—it could well have been that this cycle was different because of the short nature of it and the very strong—the number of job openings, for example, you would have thought that that would have pulled people back in. but, really, it’s the pandemic, it’s a range of factors. but the reality is, we don’t have a strong labor force participation recovery yet, and we may not have it for some time. at the same time, we have to make policy now. and inflation is well above target. so this is something we need to take into—take into account. nick timiraos. if i could—if i could follow up, you’ve talked recently about risk management. and so does that mean that the committee might feel compelled to raise interest rates before you’re convinced that you’ve achieved the employment test in your forward guidance? chair powell. so this is—this is not at all a decision that the committee has made. but you’re really asking a question about how our framework works. and, yes, there is a— there’s a provision, it used to be called the “balanced approach” provision, that says, in effect, that in situations in which the pursuit of the maximum-employment goal and [the pursuit of] the  price-stability goal are not complementary, we have to take account of the distance from the goal and the—and the speed at which we’re approaching it. and so that is, in effect, an “off-ramp” which could, in concept, be taken and it’s in our framework, it’s been in our framework a long time. i’ve talked about it on a number of occasions. it, it is a provision that would enable us to, in this case, because of high inflation, move before achieving maximum employment. now, we’re—as i said, we’re making rapid progress toward maximum employment in my—in my thinking, in my opinion. and i don’t at all know that we will—that we’ll have to invoke that, that paragraph. but just as a factual matter, that is part of our framework—and has been, really, for a very long time. nick timiraos. thank you. michelle smith. thanks. we’ll go to howard at reuters. howard schneider. thanks, as usual. so i guess i gotta ask about the elephant in the room, which is the omicron variant. you know, this seems to already be pushing one of your colleagues, the bank of england, off its course. things have evolved very fast there. hasn’t quite hit the shores of the u.s. in full force yet. but people seem to expect it to. so i’m wondering, in your feelings about this, are you convinced that this is going to be perhaps a more infectious, but less serious, variant of the virus? or are you simply confident that the u.s. economy can continue its divorce from the pandemic? chair powell. well, i think there’s a lot of uncertainty, which is why we—why we called it out in our statement, our postmeeting statement, as a risk. it’s—we, we follow the same experts and i—we, we talk privately to the same experts that everyone else does and read the same articles in the paper and the same research and, you know, so the—you mentioned the early assessment is highly transmissible, perhaps not as severe, some continuing protection from, from  existing vaccines and also existing immunity from having had the disease. that’s a first draft. we’re a long way from knowing what it will turn out to be. it may well come to the united states and replace delta as the dominant variant fairly quickly. that could easily happen. i think there’s another step there, though—which is what’s going to be the effect on the economy. and that will depend, you know, on how much it suppresses demand as opposed to suppressing supply. it is not clear how big the effects would be on either inflation or growth or hiring on top of what’s already going on, which is quite a strong, you know, wave of delta that’s hitting large parts of the country across the northern united states and all the way to the eastern seaboard and now coming down. we’re having quite a wave of delta. so coming in on top of that, again, it’s very difficult to say what the economic effects would be. i do think, wave upon wave, people are learning to live with this. more and more people are getting vaccinated. so [vaccinated] people who get the new variant, it affects them much less than it tends to affect, in the aggregate, people who are not vaccinated. so the more people get vaccinated, the less the economic effect. it doesn’t mean it won’t have an economic effect. delta had an effect of slowing down hiring. and it actually—it had an effect on global supply chains. and that sort of—that hurt the process of the global supply chains getting worked out. so it can have an economic effect. i just think, at this point, we don’t know much. we’ll know a whole lot more in three weeks, and we’ll know more than that in six weeks. howard schneider. but if i can follow up: you’re clearly, sort of from a risk standpoint, comfortable putting away one of your tools pretty soon. which sort of implies that whatever omicron brings, you’re comfortable the economy can handle it without quantitative easing.  chair powell. yes. yes, look, i think—if you look at the state of the economy and the amount—the strength of demand, the strength of just overall demand, and the strength of demand for labor, look at inflation, look at wages. i think moving, you know, moving forward the end of our taper by a few months is really—is really an appropriate thing to do. and i think, really, omicron doesn’t really have much to do with that. howard schneider. thank you. michelle smith. let’s go to jeanna at the new york times. jeanna smialek. hey, chairman powell. thanks for taking our questions. i wonder if you could talk a little bit about what prompted your recent pivot toward greater wariness around inflation. chair powell. sure. so i guess i would go back and—you know, it’s been a continual process, really. inflation really popped up, right? in the late spring last year. and we had a view—it was very, very widely held in the forecasting community—that this would be temporary. it was quite narrow, you know, a limited number of factors were causing it. and there was a decent amount of evidence to support that view, that it would be temporary or transitory, as we said. certainly, we had five months of declining month on month—monthly readings of inflation, but we didn’t see much in the way of progress on labor supply or on other supply-side issues. then in september, i’d say after labor day, we started to see—it started to become clear that this was both larger in its effect on inflation and more persistent. and, of course, i said so on many occasions, and one of the consequences of that is that we move the taper forward. we moved the taper forward and we—and it’s a much faster taper than had been planned. so we’ve been adapting—i’ve been saying we’re adapting our policy.  so coming to your real question, we got the eci reading on the eve of the november meeting—it was the friday before the november meeting—and it was very high, 5.7 percent reading for the employment compensation index for the third quarter, not annualized, for the third quarter, just before the meeting. and i thought for a second there whether we—whether we should increase our taper, [we] decided to go ahead with what we had—what we had “socialized.” then, right after that, we got the next friday after the meeting, two days after the meeting, we got a very strong employment report and, you know, revisions to prior readings and, and no increase in labor supply. and the friday after that, we got the cpi, which was a very hot, high reading. and i, honestly, at that point, really decided that i thought we needed to—we needed to look at, at speeding up the taper. and we went to work on that. so that’s, that’s really what happened. it was essentially higher inflation and faster—turns out much faster progress in the labor market. really, what’s happening is the unemployment rate is catching up—seems to be catching up—with a lot of the other readings of a tight labor market, 6/10 [decline] over one cycle. so that’s really what happened and, you know, widely supported in the committee today, as you can see—unanimous vote—but beyond that i think widely, widely supported, you know, this, this move. jeanna smialek. if i could just follow up quickly, you noted that the eci was one of the things that made you nervous, but you also said earlier that you don’t see signs that wages are actually factoring into inflation yet. and i guess i wonder how you think about sort of the wage picture as, as you’re making these assessments. chair powell. right. so—but i said—you, you quoted me correctly. it’s, it’s—so far, we don’t see—wages are not a big part of the high-inflation story that we’re seeing. as you look forward, let’s assume that the goods economy does sort itself out, and supply chains get  working again, and maybe there’s a rebalancing back to services and all that kind of thing. but what, what that leaves behind is the other things that can lead to persistent inflation. in particular—we don’t see this yet, but if you had something where wages were persistently— [increases in] real wages were persistently above productivity growth, that puts upward pressure on, on firms, and they raise prices. it would take something that was persistent and material for that to happen. and we don’t see that yet. but with the kind of hot labor market readings— wages we’re seeing, it’s something that we’re—that we’re watching. and the other thing, of course, is, is rents, which are very important. you know, owners’ equivalent rent. that’s another thing which is very economically sensitive. unlike the things that are causing the inflation now, this is economically sensitive—and so would be expected to move up. and so as the—as some things go down, the question is: where will we be when we come out the other side of this? and we need to keep our eyes on those things. jeanna smialek. thank you. michelle smith. thanks. we’ll go to chris at the ap. christopher rugaber. thank you. well, next year, you could see growth slowing, and you could see some disinflation, particularly if the omicron variant does spread more widely. would you delay rate hikes in that situation? and how would you think about that? and also, how would you explain rate hikes if you do follow through, in that kind of situation, with inflation fading and growth slowing? how would you explain rate hikes to the public, particularly those who may still be looking for work? chair powell. well, as you know, you know, the sep is not a plan. it’s not something we debate, negotiate over, or really discuss in terms of what the right answer should be. people write down their, their assumptions—their assessment of appropriate policy based on  their economic forecast. and so the median—what you’re talking about, the three rate increases, that’s the median of the committee—the median of the committee is also that growth will be 4 percent and then unemployment will be 3½ percent by the end of the year. so that’s a really strong economy. and, of course, if the—if the economy turns out to be quite different from that, then so will the rate. you know, we—no one will say, “oh, we can’t change our policy because we wrote something down in december.” no one’s ever said that or will. it will—the actual rate decisions we make will depend on our evolving assessment of the forecast. so, for example, if, if the economy were to slow down significantly, then you would expect that that would have an effect of slowing down rate increases. but we’d have to—you know, we look at our two goals, maximum employment and price stability, and we make policy based on them, and not with respect to what we wrote down in a prior sep. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to victoria guida at politico. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. i wanted to follow up on maximum employment. so, you know, the new framework was basically designed, as i understand it, so that there was a de-emphasis on guessing where inflation would pick up because of employment. and, basically, you were going to wait until you saw the whites of the eyes of inflation. and that’s how you would kind of know that you reached maximum employment. so, i’m wondering, you know, you’ve talked a lot about the different ways that you might measure maximum employment. but from what i understand, that’s still basically: the way that you know that you’re there is inflation. so is that understanding correct? and how is—are those signals likely to be clear right now given that you have inflation that’s caused by, you know, these supply chain disruptions that might also lead to, you know, inflation in wages and those sorts of things? so how do you sort of, like, tease out the signal of maximum employment?  chair powell. okay. so let me start by saying that the inflation that we got was not at all the inflation we were looking for or talking about in the framework. this was—it really was a completely different thing. it was to do with, you know, strong monetary policy and fiscal stimulus into an economy that was recovering rapidly, and in which there were these supply-side barriers which effectively led to, you know, in certain parts of the economy, what you might call a vertical supply curve. so, you know, automobile purchases are very interest rate-sensitive, and you would think demand would drive up the quantity of cars, but it can’t, because they don’t have semiconductors. so, so that—it was a very different kind of inflation. this is not the inflation we were looking for under our framework at all. it’s nothing to do with our framework. and our—the way we’ve approached it is really nothing to do with our framework. but coming to maximum employment, which is really your question. how do you know? so i think you look at, you know, prices and quantities. when you—if you want to look at maximum employment, you look at prices and quantities, and the main price you look at is wages. it’s one of the things you look at. and, you know, it’s—so i mentioned a number of other things. you can get to 20, if you wanted to, easily, but labor force participation, the unemployment rate, different age groups of—you know, prime-age labor force participation, in particular, gets a lot of focus, the jolts data get a lot of focus. and wages, that’s, that’s really one of the great signals. the quits rate is another one. the quits rate is really one of the very best indicators, according to a lot of labor economists, because people quit because they feel like they can get a better job. and there’s, you know, record amounts, historically high levels of that going on—suggesting, again, that you’ve got a very tight labor market. so on wages, that’s the price indicator we look at to tell us, along with all the other data, whether we’re—whether we have labor market conditions that are consistent with maximum  employment. and so that’s, that’s how we think about it. but the—one of the complications is that, again, we’ve got to make policy in real time. so how do we think about that? do we—if we think we can make labor, you know, participation might move up—if we, let’s say we knew that it would start to move up in two years, would we wait two years when inflation is running way above target? probably not, you know, so you have to make an assessment that what’s max—what is the level of maximum employment that is consistent with price stability in real time is, is one way to think about it. victoria guida. just to kind of follow up on that for a second, if you do raise interest rates next year and, you know, it’s—you’re not certain whether you’re at maximum employment, are you all going to point—when you raise interest rates, are you going to point to ways in which the labor market could still improve? chair powell. yes. i mean, i—absolutely. i, i think—well, whether or not we— whether or not we say “we’re at conditions—labor market conditions consistent with, with maximum employment” next year, we would all be open and i think expect, over time, that the level of maximum employment that’s consistent with price stability would increase further over time—for example, through increasing participation. so i—we would certainly—we would not, in any way, want to foreclose the idea that the labor market can get even better. but, again, with inflation as high as it is, we have to make policy in real time. we’ve got to make that assessment in real time. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to olivia from bloomberg. olivia rockeman. thank you. good afternoon, chair powell, and thank you for taking our questions. i wanted to follow up on some of your earlier comments about labor force participation. and i wondered, what do you think needs to change in the economy to kind of get  a meaningful recovery in labor force participation, and also whether running the economy hot, like in the last expansion, is one way of doing that? chair powell. well, the labor market is, by so many measures, hotter than it ever ran in the last—in the last expansion, if you think about it. you know, the ratio of job openings, for example, to, to vacancies is at all-time highs. quits, the wages—all those things are, are even hotter. but what would it take for labor force participation to move up more? you know, that’s—really, “why is it low?” is the question. so there, there are a bunch of answers, and all of them probably have some, you know, some validity. part of it will be that people—for certain people, they don’t want to go back in the labor force because either they’re medically vulnerable or they’re not comfortable going back while covid is still everywhere. that’s one thing. the lack of availability of childcare made for caretakers is certainly part of it—not just for children, but for older people. it has been pointed out by many that the stock market is high, people’s portfolios are stronger—they may go back to being a one-income rather than a two-income family. the same thing with people’s houses. people buy—they have a mortgage, you know, with leverage, and the house price increases, the equity they have in their home might have doubled. and they might make—reach the same conclusion. so they’re—and people have savings on their balance sheet because of forced savings because they couldn’t spend on travel and things like that and also because of, you know, because of government transfers. so, for all of those reasons—and it’s hard to know exactly the part each of them plays— we, we have a situation where we’ve had a shock to labor force participation that is not unwinding as quickly as, as many, as expected. and people—in effect, a good part of it is voluntary. you know, people—and this is how they want to maximize their welfare and that’s, that’s their, certainly their choice. in other cases, it’s something that will abate very quickly if  and when the pandemic gets under control. and the longer the pandemic goes on, you know, maybe the less likely that people will come back because they’re—you know, they get used to their new life and they lose contact with their old jobs. that’s, that’s what the evidence would say. so it’s a range of things. it isn’t that the economy lacks stimulus. you know, usually, in every other expansion, it’s that there aren’t enough jobs and people can’t find jobs and, you know, we’re stimulating demand and trying to get demand to come up. that’s not the problem here. the problem is a supply-side problem, which—what it would take to work it out, i think it’s going to be time. and the number-one thing would, would really be to have the pandemic get under control. that’s what everyone would really like to see: what does the labor force— what does the labor market look like in a world without covid? that would be the thing that we’d really like to see but, you know, it doesn’t look like that’s coming anytime soon. olivia rockeman. and just to quickly follow up on that: if some of the reason that labor force participation isn’t back to, you know, february 2020 levels is because people are voluntarily making life decisions that are different, does that make you think we’re going to end up at a lower rate overall? chair powell. well, there’s a demographic trend underlying all of this. and we actually got above the demographic trend at the end of the last expansion. but—so one would expect over time that labor force participation would, would move down because an aging population, the older people are, the lower their participation rate is. so you would expect that, that the trend would be lower and that, over time, participation would move down. the question of how much we can get back up closer to where we were in february of 2020—and, indeed, for the year or so before that—is a good one. and, i mean, i—what we can  do is try to create the conditions. there’s a lot of good for society when you have a tight but stable labor market, where people are coming in, they’re getting into the labor force, they’re getting paid well. in the labor market we had before, we had, you know—the biggest wage increases were going to people at the bottom end of the wage spectrum for the last couple of years. there were just a lot of really desirable aspects of a labor market like that. higher participation is one of them. and we’d love to get back there. but, again, ultimately, we have the tools that we have, which are essentially to stimulate demand and also to control inflation. i mean, really, it might be—one of the two big threats to getting back to maximum employment is actually high inflation, because, to get back to where we were, the evidence grows that it’s going to take some time. and what we need is another long expansion, like the ones we’ve been having. over the last 40 years, we’ve had, i think, three of the four longest in our recorded history, including the last one, which was the longest in our recorded history. that’s what it would really take to get back to the kind of labor market we’d like to see. and to have that happen, we need to make sure that we maintain price stability. michelle smith. okay, let’s go to edward lawrence at fox. edward lawrence. thanks. thanks, michelle, and thanks for taking the question, chair powell. so i was looking at the consensus data for estimated monthly changes on sales. and what you’re seeing is fewer people spending at restaurants and drinking places, more people spending at grocery stores. you see electronic sales down 4.6 percent month over month, also department store sales down 5.4 percent month over month. how concerned or what is your level of concern the consumer may be turning away from this economy or pulling back because of inflation, the virus, or something else? thank you.  chair powell. we see consumer expense as very strong in this quarter. i don’t know, edward, whether you’re talking about more shopping online versus shopping in the store, but consumer demand is very strong, incomes are very strong, you know, because people are going back to work and they’re getting wage increases. admittedly, some of the wage increases is being eaten away by inflation. but, nonetheless, incomes, overall, are going up really significantly because of increased employment and spending is—has been strong. there may be something in the seasonality that this year’s holiday spending may have been pulled forward. and, of course, there may be effects from, from delta and there might be going forward from omicron. but fundamentally, though, the consumer is really healthy, and we expect personal consumption expenditures to be pretty strong in the fourth quarter. michelle smith. okay, let’s go to mike at bloomberg. michael mckee. mr. chairman, the median forecast for inflation in this month’s or this meeting’s economic projections has been revised up significantly for 2021 but barely moved for 2022 and 2023. you’ve said you expect inflation to fall significantly. is that because you’re going to raise interest rates or because the virus is going to fade and the effects are going to fade? in other words, is it a question of when, not if, you raise interest rates? and does it suggest that maybe your critics are correct and you might be afraid you’re “behind the curve”? chair powell. so, actually, i’m looking at the sep here, and the median forecasts for core and headline inflation did move up by 4/10 each. so that’s a significant—you know, in an sep, that’s a pretty significant move up. you know, it’s, it’s based on both of those things, i suppose. i do think there’s a broad expectation among forecasters, including our own, that the bottlenecks will alleviate sometime over the course of this year. if you look at where blue chip forecasts are—which is, you know, a group of well-resourced, large forecasting operations with a  long track record—they’ll show inflation coming back down significantly toward the back-end of next year. i would say, though, as well that our policy should begin to have an effect. there will be a lag, but it should begin to have an effect on that as well. and, you know, that’s the most likely case. i guess what—the thing i would want to say, though, is we can’t act as though that’s a certainty, and we’re not going to act as though that’s a certainty. there’s a real risk now, we believe, i believe, that inflation may be more persistent and that may be putting inflation expectations under pressure, and that the risk of higher inflation becoming entrenched has increased. it’s certainly increased. i don’t think it’s high at this moment, but i think it’s increased. and i think that’s part of the reason behind our move today. [it] is to put ourselves in a position to be able to deal with that risk. and i think we are in a position to deal with that risk. we need to see more data. we need to see how the inflation data and the—all the data evolve in coming months, but we are prepared to, you know, to use our tools to make sure that higher inflation doesn’t get entrenched. for one reason, as i—as i just mentioned, it’s one of the two big threats, the other being the pandemic itself, to getting back to maximum employment. michelle smith. let’s go to michael derby at the wall street journal. michael derby. yeah. thanks for taking my question. so as the fed shifts towards an accelerated taper, i wonder what your read is on financial-stability risks right now. i mean, these periods can be—you know, it seems like the taper process has gone fairly smooth so far. but, you know, what do you see in terms of stability risks? are there any parts of the financial sector that concern you right now? and are there any significant systemic issues that are on your radar, you know, maybe from the cryptocurrency sector or something like that?  chair powell. you know, we have—we have had now for a decade and more a four-part financial stability framework that we use so we can—we can hold ourselves to the same kind of framework and, you know, not just treat each event individually. and there are four key areas: asset valuations, debt owed by households and businesses, funding risk, and leverage among financial institutions. so i would say asset valuations—i’m going to go really superficially here, but asset valuations are somewhat elevated, i would say. debt owed by businesses, you know, and households—households are in very strong financial shape. businesses actually have a lot of debt, but their default rates are very, very low. but, nonetheless, it’s something we’re watching. funding risk is, by and large, low among, among financial institutions. but we do see money market funds as a vulnerability and, and, you know, would applaud the sec’s action this week. leverage among financial institutions is low, in the sense that [their] capital is high. so, overall, you know, financial stability, that’s how—i wouldn’t make an overall characteristic, but we break it down into those pieces. in terms of the things, you know, that we’re—that we’re looking for, looking at, you know, it’s the—it’s the things we’ve already talked about, to some extent. it’s, it’s the emergence of a new variant that could, you know, that could lead to significant economic—if there were to be a variant, for example, [and if] that were quite resistant to vaccines, it could have another significant effect on the economy. we don’t see that. we don’t have any basis for thinking that the new variant that we have is that one, but it’s certainly one we’re looking at. i would say, you know, cyber risk, the risk of a successful cyberattack, is, for me, you know, always the most—you know, one that would be very difficult to deal with. i think we know how to deal with bad loans and things like that. i think more—a cyberattack that were to take down a major financial institution or financial market utility would be a really significant financial  stability risk that we haven’t actually faced yet. so i could go on with a list of “horribles,” but i think that’s a decent picture of where i would start. michael derby. how about the cryptocurrency issues? anything that worries you there that’s going on in there in terms of—you know, obviously a lot’s happening in that sector. does that concern you at all? chair powell. you know, i think the concerns there are not so much current financial-stability concerns. i, of course, would support the, the views expressed in the president’s working group report on stablecoins. stablecoins can certainly be a useful, efficient, consumer-serving, part of the financial system, if they’re properly regulated. and, right now, they aren’t. and, and they have the potential to scale [up], particularly if they were to be, you know, associated with one of the very large tech networks that exist and you could have a payment network that was immediately systemically important—close to immediately systemically important that didn’t have appropriate regulation and protections. the public relies on the government—and [on] the fed, in particular—to make sure that the payment system is safe and reliable, as well as the dollar and—you know, to provide a safe and reliable trusted currency. so—but i do think those are longer term. in terms of, you know, the more—the cryptocurrencies, you know, that are really speculative assets, i don’t see them as a financial-stability concern at the moment. i do think they are risky, they’re not backed by anything, and i think there’s big consumer—issues for consumers who may or may not understand what they’re getting. and there’s certainly developments in the—in the markets that are worth following, which are really not in our jurisdiction, but things like, you know, the kind of leverage that’s built into and those sorts of things is certainly worth, worth watching.  michelle smith. let’s go to nancy marshall-genzer at marketplace. nancy marshall-genzer. chair powell. hi, chair powell, thanks for the question. going back to inflation, is the fed “behind the curve” on getting inflation under control? chair powell. so i would say this. i actually think we are well positioned to deal with, with what’s coming, with the range of plausible outcomes that can come. i do. and i think if you look at how we got here, i do think we’ve, we’ve been adapting to the incoming data, really all the way along, and, you know, noticing and calling out that, that the—both the effects and the persistence of inflation of bottlenecks and labor shortages and things like that. so we’ve been calling out the fact that those were becoming longer, and more persistent, and larger. and now we’re in a position where we’re ending our taper within the next—well, by march, in two meetings, and we’ll be in a position to raise interest rates as and when we think it’s appropriate. and we will, if that—to the extent that’s appropriate. at the same time, we’re going to be seeing a few more months of data. i don’t actually think we’re out of position now. i think this was an important move for us to make. i think that the data that we got toward the end of the fall was a—was a really strong signal that inflation is more persistent and higher—and that the risk of it remaining higher for longer has grown. and i think we’re reacting to that now. and we’ll continue to adapt our policy. so i wouldn’t look at it that we’re “behind the curve.” i would look at it that we’re actually in position now to take the steps that we’ll need to take, you know, in a thoughtful manner to address all of the issues, including that of, of too-high inflation. michelle smith. let’s go to evan at market news. evan ryser. hi, chair powell. thank you. i was wondering if we should still be seeing the taper and interest rate hikes as separate. and, secondly, in the last cycle, the fed  started shrinking the balance sheet when short-term interest rates were about 1 to 1¼ percent range. do you think the fomc might be able to potentially start running off assets before that this time? chair powell. are they separate? so our interest rate—i mean, they are separate tools. so the—you know, the, the asset purchases are a separate tool from interest rates. stopping asset purchases does not remove accommodation. it just stops adding further accommodation. whereas raising interest rates starts to remove accommodation from what is a highly accommodative stance. you know, the extent to which they’ll be separated in time is, is something we haven’t really discussed at the committee [meetings] yet. we will be discussing that, obviously, in coming meetings. i don’t think that, that—the last cycle, there was quite a long separation before interest rates. i don’t think that’s at all likely in this cycle. we’re in a very, very different place with high inflation, strong growth, a really strong economy. you know, that—as i mentioned, the sep medians are for 4 percent growth next year, 3½ percent— 3½ percent unemployment at the end of the year, and the, the—you know, headline inflation of 2.6 percent next year, core at 2.7. so this is a strong economy, one in which it’s appropriate for, for interest rate hikes. so they’re separate, i would say. your—sorry, your second question was? evan ryser. my second question was about runoff. chair powell. runoff. evan ryser. in the last cycle. chair powell. so, you know, with the balance sheet, we did have a balance sheet discussion, sort of a prelim—a first, first discussion of balance sheet issues today, [balance] sheet issues, at our meeting this week. we’ll have another at the next meeting and another at the  meeting after that i suspect. these are interesting issues to discuss. [we] didn’t make any decisions today. we looked back at what happened in the last cycle, and people thought that was interesting and informative. and—but to one degree or another, people noted that this is just a different situation, and those differences should inform the decisions we make about the balance sheet this time. so [we] haven’t made any decisions at all about, about when runoff would start, but we’re—we’ll be continuing to—you know, in relation to when either liftoff happens or the end of the taper. but those are exactly the decisions we’ll be turning to in coming meetings. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to scott horsley at npr. scott horsley. thanks, mr. chairman. i think you said a few minutes ago that the inflation that we got during the pandemic was not the inflation that we—that you anticipated when you crafted the framework. and you described it as a collision of a lot of monetary and fiscal stimulus with these supply-side hiccups. does that mean the stimulus was mistaken, or is the inflation just a consequence of—that we have to put up with because of that? chair powell. no, i’m not expressing any judgment about, about the stimulus in, in that comment. what i’m saying is, there’s a—there’s a sense among some that “you wanted inflation, this is what you wanted, how do you like it?,” you know? and the truth is, this is not the inflation that we were—what we were talking about in the—in the framework was inflation that comes from a tight labor market, right? so we had 3½ percent unemployment for a period, and we had inflation that was just barely getting to 2 percent. and i—you know, i think, in that setting, our thinking was, we can afford to wait to raise rates until we see actual inflation rather than [acting] preemptive[ly] because, you know, no one had seen what 3½ percent unemployment would look like—with high labor force participation, by the way. no one had seen what it would look—really look like for an extended period, for decades. and we didn’t  know what the inflationary implications were. it turned out there was barely 2 percent inflation—and no sense that it was gaining momentum and that kind of thing. so we incorporated that into our framework. this is something completely different. you know, that’s a situation where you had a very, very high level of employment and low inflation. this is literally the opposite. or, you know, it has been the opposite, where we have very high inflation and we’ve had it since the labor market was in terrible shape. it had nothing—so far, this inflation has really nothing to do with tightness in the labor market. it does have to do with, with strong demand, and strong demand was supported by the fed, it was supported by congress. i’m not making any judgments on congress, it’s not my job. but i will just say, we’re coming out of a, you know, what we certainly hope will be a once in a lifetime, certainly historic—the first really global modern pandemic—which looked at the beginning like it might cause a global depression. and, you know, so we threw a lot of support at it [the economy]. and what’s coming out now is, is, you know, really strong growth, really strong demand, high incomes, and all that kind of thing. you know, people will judge in 25 years whether we—whether we overdid it or not, but, you know, the reality is, we are where we are. and, you know, we think our policy is, is the right one for the situation that we’re in. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to brian cheung. brian cheung. hi, chairman powell. wanted to ask about the bond markets. when you see the 10-year at 146 basis points, do you have any sort of concerns about an environment by which you might be hiking interest rates into? would you prefer the curve be a little bit steeper? what are you gleaning from the bond market actions over the last six weeks?  chair powell. so i, i think the short-end actions are easy to understand, which is, you know, they’re basically very [monetary] policy-sensitive rates at the short end, and it makes sense that it’s reacting to changes in expectations for policy. i think a lot of things go into the, you know, the long rates. and the place i would start is just look at global sovereign yields around the world. look at jgbs, look at bunds, and they’re so much lower. you can get—you can get, you know, a much higher yield on u.s. treasuries by buying usts rather than bunds and you can—you can hedge, hedge the currency risk back into yen, back into euros and still be way ahead. so, in a way, it’s not surprising that there’s a lot of demand for, for u.s. sovereigns in a world—you know, in a risk-free world where, where there’s so much—they’re yielding so much more than bunds are, than jgbs. so that’s, that’s a big part of it. i also think, you know, there, there may be some assessment in there of what the neutral rate is or what the terminal rate is. i don’t know about that. but—and i would just say that we, you know, we write down our own estimates of the—of the terminal rate or the neutral rate of interest. those are highly uncertain. and, you know, we’ll make policy based on what we’re seeing in the economy rather than based on what a neutral—what a model might say the neutral rate is. we, we all had the experience of the last cycle, where we all, through that cycle, were trying to estimate what the neutral rate was, and it turned out—you know, i think we learned a lot from seeing what happens. we ended up cutting rates three times after raising them to 2¼ to 2½ percent. so i’m not troubled by where the long bond [rate] is. you know, i see that it’s low. you know, i mean, we’re really focused on broader financial conditions, [and] we’re focused on maximum employment and price stability. michelle smith. thank you. for the last question, we’ll go to greg robb.  greg robb. thank you very much. chair powell, i was wondering if—i wanted to give you the opportunity to talk about something that i’ve heard that’s been discussed—that, you know, your pivot towards a tighter policy, hawkish policy stance had something to do with the timing of your renomination by the president. thank you. chair powell. sure, i’d be happy to talk about that. so, as i mentioned, we got the eci reading just before the november meeting. we got the labor market report two days after the meeting. and then, one week after that, i think on the 12th of november, we got the cpi reading. it was really the cpi reading, in concert with those two, and i, i just came to the view over that weekend that we needed to speed up the taper. and we started working on that. that's a full 10 days or so before the president made a decision of renominating me. so, honestly, it had—it had nothing to do with that at all. and i just thought this is what we got to do. my colleagues were out talking about the—a faster taper. and that doesn’t happen by accident. they were out talking about a faster taper before the president made his decision. so it’s a decision that effectively was in—more than in train and, you know, to the point where people were talking about it publicly. so that’s what happened. and it had absolutely nothing to do with it whatsoever. we’re always going to just do what we think is the right thing, and i certainly will always just do what i think the right thing is for the economy and for the people that we serve. greg robb. just a quick follow-up. i guess that some people are saying that it was the, you know, the stimulus in march that was sort of over—we didn’t really need all that stimulus, and that there was talk even then that that would be a mistake and it would lead to higher inflation. and perhaps that you didn’t push back as much as you might have otherwise.  chair powell. i didn’t push back at all. and the reason i didn’t—and there was no—there was lots of talk about that, but not from the fed, because that is not our job. we are not the cbo, and we’re not elected by anybody. so we take fiscal policy as it arrives at our front door, and we don’t comment—you know, we make our own assessments inside the fed, but it’s really not our role. and i think, very important, that we stay out of that business, no matter who’s in the white house, who’s in congress. it’s just—it’s just not our job and it’s something we avoid pretty, pretty assiduously. greg robb. thank you. chair powell. thank you. michelle smith. thank you, mr. chair. thank you, everyone.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments over the period. financial markets responded to significant new information about the economy and monetary policy, as well as the emergence of the omicron variant. overall, domestic financial conditions tightened modestly but remained near historically accommodative levels. expectations for an earlier reduction in federal reserve policy accommodation lifted short-term interest rates and supported the dollar. while prices of equities that are sensitive to covid-19 risks declined significantly, the s&p 500 index was little changed. over the period, market participants considered potential drivers of the notable decline in far-forward sovereign yields in the united states and other advanced economies. news of the omicron variant reportedly drove safe-haven flows into sovereign bonds, pushing term premiums lower. the significant co-movement between far-forward yields and the share prices of firms most affected by social distancing was consistent with this interpretation. in addition to the effects of the pandemic on risk sentiment, some discussed the potential for covid to become endemic, possibly resulting in modestly lower potential growth over time and a lower long-run neutral level of the federal funds rate. regarding the outlook for u.s. monetary policy, expectations for a reduction in policy accommodation shifted forward notably. respondents to the open market minutes of the meeting of december 14–15, 2021 page 3  desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants broadly projected that the committee would quicken the pace of reduction in the federal reserve’s net purchases of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs), and the median respondent projected net asset purchases to end in march 2022. the median respondent’s projected timing for the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate also moved earlier from the first quarter of 2023 to june 2022. although the desk surveys and interest rate futures indicated expectations for earlier increases in the target range than at the time of the november meeting, expectations for the federal funds rate at longer horizons did not appear to have risen. in addition, the average of probability distributions for the federal funds rate reported in the desk surveys suggested considerable uncertainty about the path of the federal funds rate, as survey respondents placed significant odds on a range of outcomes. with the likely timing of the beginning of the removal of policy accommodation considered closer, market participants began to discuss how balance sheet policy might feature in the committee’s plan for reducing accommodation when warranted, although expectations for the timing of the first decline in the balance sheet were diffuse. the manager turned next to a discussion of foreign developments. foreign policy-sensitive rates were relatively steady over the intermeeting period, as several central banks in advanced foreign economies (afes) signaled somewhat cautious approaches to the removal of policy accommodation. market participants continued to focus on risks related to economic and financial developments in china, though near-term concerns had moderated some following steps by chinese authorities to ease policy. turning to desk operations and money markets, the manager noted that the desk had reduced net purchases of treasury securities and agency mbs in accordance with the directive issued at the november meeting. overall, the transition to a slower pace of purchases had gone smoothly. in money markets, news that a path had emerged to a resolution of the debt ceiling impasse led yields on treasury bills maturing in december and january to decline. following the resolution, the treasury was expected to increase bill issuance to restore the treasury general account to more normal levels. market participants generally were not anticipating significant strains in money market conditions over year end. in discussing recently established backstop facilities, the manager noted continued progress towards expanding access to the standing repurchase agreement (repo) facility (srf) to depository institutions; a number of institutions were currently in the process of becoming srf counterparties. the federal reserve also continued to onboard new counterparties for the foreign and international monetary authorities repo facility, and customers to the facility now represented the majority of foreign and international monetary authorities’ custody holdings of treasury securities at the federal reserve bank of new york. the temporary dollar liquidity swap lines established in march 2020 were set to expire on december 31; the committee’s foreign currency directive would be updated at the january meeting to reflect the expiration of those lines. finally, the manager provided an update on the transition away from libor (london interbank offered rate). overall, considerable progress had been made in the transition away from libor to the secured overnight financing rate (sofr) in cash and derivatives markets. however, a few key areas of work remained. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. discussion of policy normalization considerations participants began a discussion of a range of topics associated with the eventual normalization of the stance of monetary policy. the topics included the lessons learned from the committee’s previous experience with policy normalization, alternative approaches for removing policy accommodation, the timing and sequencing of policy normalization actions, and the appropriate size and composition of the federal reserve’s balance sheet in the longer run. they agreed that their discussion at this meeting would be helpful background for the committee’s future decisions regarding policy normalization. no decisions regarding the committee’s approach were made at the meeting. the participants’ discussion was preceded by staff presentations. the staff reviewed the previous normalization episode, including how the committee commenced normalization by raising the target range for the federal funds rate and then reducing the federal reserve’s asset holdings in a gradual and predictable manner, as well as the timing of these steps. the staff then discussed some of the channels through which policy rate and balance sheet actions affect financial conditions page 4 federal open market committee  and alternative ways these tools could be deployed to reduce policy accommodation in support of the committee’s macroeconomic goals. the staff presentation included assessments of the implications for the yield curve of alternative settings of the two tools, the relative uncertainty of the effects of each tool, and the challenges associated with conducting and communicating policy with multiple tools. finally, the staff reviewed the experience of foreign central banks with policy normalization. participants judged that several aspects of the previous approach remained applicable in the current environment. in particular, they noted that the principles and plans underlying policy normalization were communicated in advance of any decisions or actions, which enhanced the public’s understanding and thus the effectiveness of monetary policy during that period. at the same time, participants remarked that the previous experience highlighted the benefits of maintaining the flexibility to adjust the details of the approach to normalization in response to economic and financial developments. participants generally emphasized that, as in the previous normalization episode and as expressed in the committee’s statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, changes in the target range for the federal funds rate should be the committee’s primary means for adjusting the stance of monetary policy in support of its maximum-employment and price-stability objectives. this preference reflected the view that there is less uncertainty about the effects of changes in the federal funds rate on the economy than about the effects of changes in the federal reserve’s balance sheet. moreover, participants stated that the federal funds rate is a more familiar tool to the general public and therefore is advantageous for communication purposes. a few participants also noted that when the federal funds rate is away from the effective lower bound (elb), the committee could more nimbly change interest rate policy than balance sheet policy in response to economic conditions. participants also discussed some key differences between current economic conditions and those that prevailed during the previous episode and remarked that the committee would have to take these differences into account in removing policy accommodation. most notably, participants remarked that the current economic outlook was much stronger, with higher inflation and a tighter labor market than at the beginning of the previous normalization episode. they also observed that the federal reserve’s balance sheet was much larger, both in dollar terms and relative to nominal gross domestic product (gdp), than it was at the end of the third largescale asset purchase program in late 2014. participants noted that the current weighted average maturity of the federal reserve’s treasury holdings was shorter than at the beginning of the previous normalization episode. some observed that, as a result, depending on the size of any caps put on the pace of runoff, the balance sheet could potentially shrink faster than last time if the committee followed its previous approach in phasing out the reinvestment of maturing treasury securities and principal payments on agency mbs. however, several participants raised concerns about vulnerabilities in the treasury market and how those vulnerabilities could affect the appropriate pace of balance sheet normalization. a couple of participants noted that the srf could help to mitigate such concerns. participants also judged the federal reserve to be better positioned for normalization than in the past, as the ample-reserves framework and the federal reserve’s current interest rate control tools, including interest on reserve balances and the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility, are in place and working well. some participants judged that a significant amount of balance sheet shrinkage could be appropriate over the normalization process, especially in light of abundant liquidity in money markets and elevated usage of the on rrp facility. participants had an initial discussion about the appropriate conditions and timing for starting balance sheet runoff relative to raising the federal funds rate from the elb. they also discussed how this relative timing might differ from the previous experience, in which balance sheet runoff commenced almost two years after policy rate liftoff when the normalization of the federal funds rate was judged to be well under way. almost all participants agreed that it would likely be appropriate to initiate balance sheet runoff at some point after the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate. however, participants judged that the appropriate timing of balance sheet runoff would likely be closer to that of policy rate liftoff than in the committee’s previous experience. they noted that current conditions included a stronger economic outlook, higher inflation, and a larger balance sheet and thus could warrant a potentially faster pace of policy rate normalization. they emphasized that the decision to initiate runoff would be data dependent. some participants commented that removing policy accommodation by relying more on balance sheet reduction and less on increases in the policy rate could help limit yield curve flattening during policy normalization. minutes of the meeting of december 14–15, 2021 page 5  a few of these participants raised concerns that a relatively flat yield curve could adversely affect interest margins for some financial intermediaries, which may raise financial stability risks. however, a couple of other participants referenced staff analysis and previous experience in noting that many factors can affect longer-dated yields, making it difficult to judge how a different policy mix would affect the shape of the yield curve. many participants judged that the appropriate pace of balance sheet runoff would likely be faster than it was during the previous normalization episode. many participants also judged that monthly caps on the runoff of securities could help ensure that the pace of runoff would be measured and predictable, particularly given the shorter weighted average maturity of the federal reserve’s treasury security holdings. participants discussed considerations regarding the longer-run size of the balance sheet consistent with the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy in an ample-reserves regime. participants noted that the current size of the balance sheet is elevated and would likely remain so for some time after the process of normalizing the balance sheet was under way. several participants noted that the level of reserves that would ultimately be needed to implement monetary policy effectively is uncertain, because the underlying demand for reserves by banks is time varying. in light of this uncertainty and the committee’s previous experience, a couple of participants expressed a preference to allow for a substantial buffer level of reserves to support interest rate control. participants noted that it would be important to carefully monitor developments in money markets as the level of reserves fell to help inform the committee’s eventual assessment of the appropriate level for the balance sheet in the longer run. some participants expressed the view that the srf would help ensure interest rate control as the size of the balance sheet approached its longer-run level; several participants noted that the srf could facilitate a faster runoff of the balance sheet than might otherwise be the case; several participants raised the possibility that the establishment of the srf could reduce the demand for reserves in the longer run, suggesting that the longer-run balance sheet could be smaller than otherwise. participants also discussed the composition of the federal reserve’s asset holdings. consistent with the previous normalization principles, some participants expressed a preference for the federal reserve’s asset holdings to consist primarily of treasury securities in the longer run. to achieve such a composition, some participants favored reinvesting principal from agency mbs into treasury securities relatively soon or letting agency mbs run off the balance sheet faster than treasury securities. participants welcomed additional analysis from the staff on issues related to normalization and agreed that continuing their deliberations at upcoming meetings would be useful. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the december 14–15 meeting suggested that u.s. real gdp growth was picking up in the fourth quarter after having slowed in the third quarter. labor market conditions continued to improve in october and november, and measures of compensation had risen sharply so far this year. consumer price inflation through october—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—remained elevated. total nonfarm payroll employment rose solidly, on average, in october and november, but the average gain was below that seen in recent quarters. the unemployment rate declined from 4.8 percent in september to 4.2 percent in november; the unemployment rates for african americans and hispanics also declined substantially over this period, but both rates remained well above the national average. the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio both moved up in november. private-sector job openings, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, remained well above pre-pandemic levels; quits rates also stayed elevated despite edging down in october. the four-week moving average of initial claims for regular state unemployment insurance moved lower through early december and was at a level similar to that seen before the pandemic. recent weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls constructed by the board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp pointed to a further increase in private employment through early december. average hourly earnings rose 4.8 percent over the 12 months ending in november, with sizable wage gains observed across most sectors. inflation readings remained high, and various indicators suggested that inflationary pressures had broadened in recent months. total pce price inflation was 5.0 percent over the 12 months ending in october, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.1 percent over the same period. the trimmed page 6 federal open market committee  mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 2.6 percent in october, an increase of 0.6 percentage point relative to two months earlier. in november, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 6.8 percent, while core cpi inflation was 4.9 percent over the same period. survey-based measures of medium- and longer-run inflation expectations—including those from the university of michigan surveys of consumers, the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations, and the survey of professional forecasters—leveled off after having risen over the past year. real pce growth appeared to be picking up in the fourth quarter despite an upturn in covid-19 cases, the waning effect of previous fiscal stimulus measures, lingering supply bottlenecks, and recent increases in consumer prices. in particular, real expenditures on retail goods rose solidly again in october, and outlays for services strengthened. in november, however, the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate pce stepped down, possibly reflecting some holiday sales having been pulled forward to october. light motor vehicle sales in october and november were below their third-quarter average (though they were up, on net, relative to september), as extremely low dealer inventories continued to constrain sales. housing demand remained strong, but indicators of housing-sector activity, including housing starts and home sales, were generally little changed in october. shortages of construction materials appeared to have hampered building completions, and there was limited availability of lots ready for construction. growth in business fixed investment appeared to be rising at a slow pace again in the fourth quarter, as supply bottlenecks continued to weigh on business equipment spending, and the limited availability of construction materials was still holding back spending on nonresidential structures. manufacturing output increased in october, and available indicators of production were consistent with another gain in november. motor vehicle output moved up in october from its low level in september, as most assembly plants previously shuttered by semiconductor chip shortages had reopened. outside of motor vehicles, manufacturing production also rose in october, partly reflecting the continued recovery from the effects of hurricane ida on the output of the petrochemical, refining, and plastic resins industries. total real government purchases appeared to be rising moderately again in the fourth quarter. federal defense spending rose, on net, in october and november relative to the third quarter. however, growth in state and local government purchases appeared to be moderating, as payrolls decreased in october and november, and nominal state and local construction expenditures in october were only a little above their third-quarter level. after reaching a record level in september, the u.s. international trade deficit narrowed in october, reflecting a large rebound in exports. the export rebound was broad based, with sizable increases in real exports of industrial supplies, capital goods, agricultural products, and consumer goods. exports of automotive products also picked up after having been low in recent months. real imports were little changed in october, with increases in imports of automotive products and consumer goods offset by a decline in industrial supplies. shipping congestion and other bottlenecks continued to restrain overall trade in goods. exports and imports of services edged up in october but remained low relative to pre-pandemic levels, largely because international travel was still depressed. incoming data were consistent with a pickup in foreign economic growth in the current quarter, driven mainly by the reopening of asian economies following lockdowns earlier in the year to contain a resurgence of covid-19 cases. strong gains in intra-asian trade and solid readings of purchasing managers indexes also provided some early signs that production bottlenecks in the region were easing. in contrast, the introduction of new public health restrictions in europe in response to a new wave of covid-19 infections appeared to have restrained economic activity in some european economies. more recently, the detection and rapid spread of the omicron variant prompted new international travel restrictions in many foreign economies. inflation abroad continued to rise, mostly driven by further increases in retail energy and food prices. in addition, cost pressures from persistent bottlenecks in supply and transportation were reflected in record-high input and output price components of the purchasing managers indexes. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, rising inflation and fomc communications appeared to have put substantial upward pressure on shorter-dated treasury yields. even so, longer-dated treasury yields declined, on net, in part reflecting renewed concerns among market par- minutes of the meeting of december 14–15, 2021 page 7  ticipants about the course of the pandemic and associated safe-haven flows. pandemic-related fears as well as concerns about inflation and tighter monetary policy apparently weighed on risky asset prices despite continued robust economic data. in domestic markets, broad equity price indexes were little changed, equity market volatility increased markedly, and spreads on corporate bonds widened moderately. in afes, sovereign yields declined, and major equity indexes edged down. shortterm funding markets were stable, while participation in the on rrp facility increased further. overall, financing conditions for businesses and households remained accommodative except for small businesses and nonprime borrowers. market participants’ views on the expected path for the federal funds rate—as implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes—suggested that they had pulled forward expected rate increases more into 2022 and 2023 compared with the timing they anticipated at the time of the previous fomc meeting. the potential for a less accommodative policy stance over the next few years contributed to a notable rise in two- and five-year treasury yields. on net, inflation compensation had declined moderately since the november fomc meeting, as heightened concerns about the inflation outlook appeared to be outweighed by increases in the perceived prospects for tighter monetary policy and by fears about the course of the pandemic. renewed concerns about the course of the pandemic also contributed to a decline in the 10-year treasury yield, on net, over the intermeeting period despite stronger-than-anticipated data on economic activity and surprisingly high inflation. broad equity indexes were little changed, on net, since the previous fomc meeting, as strong economic data appeared to offset concerns regarding monetary policy, inflation, and the pandemic. spreads of both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds widened moderately, and spreads of municipal bonds were little changed. short-term funding markets were stable over the intermeeting period. throughout the period, the effective federal funds rate remained at 8 basis points apart from a brief decrease on the november month-end, and the sofr remained at 5 basis points. participation in on rrp operations increased slightly to an average of $1.5 trillion. foreign asset prices fluctuated over the intermeeting period in response to central bank communications, headlines regarding covid-related restrictions in some countries, and the spread of the omicron variant. on net, afe sovereign yields declined, major foreign equity indexes generally edged down, and the broad dollar index increased modestly. emerging market economy (eme) sovereign spreads widened, and capital flows into eme-dedicated funds turned slightly negative in the second half of november, partly in response to concerns about the omicron variant. a credit agency declared two heavily indebted chinese property developers to be in “restricted default,” hurting asset prices in china’s real estate sector, but spillovers to broader financial markets were limited. in domestic credit markets, financing conditions for nonfinancial corporations remained accommodative. gross corporate bond issuance by both investment- and speculative-grade borrowers was solid, and gross leveraged loan issuance was robust. equity raised through traditional initial public offerings also was strong, but equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies remained much weaker than earlier this year. in november, commercial and industrial (c&i) loans on banks’ books grew for the first time since the beginning of the year. the share of paycheck protection program loans in c&i loan balances at banks continued to fall in the third quarter amid ongoing forgiveness of those loans. the credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations remained solid amid strong earnings growth. s&p 500 firms’ earnings reports for the third quarter again exceeded analyst expectations. in november, the volume of upgrades outpaced that of downgrades for both investment- and speculative-grade nonfinancial corporate bonds. trailing default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans declined to close to historical lows in october and november, and market indicators of future default expectations remained benign. in the municipal bond market, issuance was robust in october and november, and financing conditions remained accommodative, supported by low yields. the credit quality of municipal debt continued to be stable, as the number of bond upgrades outpaced downgrades, and defaults were relatively low. survey-based indicators suggested that credit supply conditions for small firms remained stable but tighter than before the pandemic. small business loan originations ticked down in october, likely reflecting weak loan page 8 federal open market committee  demand as suggested by survey-based and market indicators. broad measures of small businesses’ financial health improved slightly. short- and long-term delinquency rates on loans to small businesses remained roughly in line with their pre-pandemic levels. financing conditions in commercial real estate (cre) markets remained accommodative. cre loan balances on banks’ books continued to expand at a solid pace in october and november. issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) continued to be strong, supported by spreads of agency and non-agency cmbs that were generally at or below pre-pandemic levels. delinquency rates on mortgages in cmbs pools continued to fall but remained elevated for loans backed by hotel and retail properties. in the residential mortgage market, financing conditions stayed accommodative, particularly for borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. conditions continued to ease for lower-score borrowers but remained somewhat tighter than before the pandemic. mortgage originations for home purchases and refinances were robust through november amid historically low mortgage rates. the fraction of mortgage borrowers missing payments continued to decline through october. financing conditions for consumer credit remained accommodative for most borrowers, especially those with higher credit scores. conditions for nonprime consumers in the credit card market continued to ease from the tight levels seen earlier in the pandemic. growth of credit card balances picked up in september and october, and bank credit data indicated a further increase in november. growth of auto loans outstanding slowed through october because of tepid auto sales. use of forbearance programs for credit card and auto loans remained at low levels in september and october. staff economic outlook the projection for u.s. consumer price inflation prepared by the staff for the december fomc meeting was higher than in the november projection. the near-term outlook was revised up, reflecting faster-than-expected increases both for a broad array of consumer prices and for wages. supply chain bottlenecks were seen as continuing to put upward pressure on prices. as a result, the 12-month change in pce prices was projected to move up further relative to october’s pace and to end the year around 5 percent. over the following two years, the boost to consumer prices caused by supply issues was expected to partly reverse, and energy prices were projected to decline. pce price inflation was therefore expected to step down to 2.1 percent in 2022 and to remain there in 2023 and 2024. projected inflation over this period was a little higher than in the previous projection, as supply bottlenecks were assumed to resolve more gradually and as the salience of this year’s higher inflation readings was assumed to raise the underlying trend in inflation relative to the previous forecast. longer-run inflation was still assumed to remain anchored at 2 percent. the staff’s forecast for economic activity remained strong but was weaker, on net, than in the november projection. although aggregate demand appeared to be rising sharply in the fourth quarter, the emerging surge in covid-19 caseloads and hospitalizations was expected to weigh on economic activity in the winter months. in addition, supply bottlenecks were expected to resolve more gradually than previously assumed. all told, real gdp was expected to post a sizable gain over 2021 as a whole and to rise a bit less rapidly in 2022, with the pace of growth supported by the continued reopening of the economy and the resolution of supply constraints in most sectors. with the boost from these factors fading, real gdp growth was projected to step down noticeably in 2023. given the higher forecast for inflation, the staff assumed monetary policy would be less accommodative in coming years and therefore revised down the medium-term forecast for gdp somewhat. even so, the level of real gdp was expected to remain well above potential throughout the projection period, and labor market conditions were projected to remain very tight. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks around the inflation projection were skewed to the upside. in particular, the possibility that covid-19 cases could continue to rise steeply, especially if the omicron variant proves to be vaccine resistant, was seen as an important source of downside risk to activity, while the possibility of more severe and persistent supply issues was viewed as an additional downside risk to activity and as an upside risk to inflation. participants’ views on current economic conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2021 through 2024 and over the longer run based on their individual assessments of ap- minutes of the meeting of december 14–15, 2021 page 9  propriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that, with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but continued to be affected by covid-19. job gains had been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy had continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants commented that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. an easing of supply constraints was expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation. risks to the economic outlook remained, including from new variants of the virus. participants observed that growth of economic activity appeared to have been strong in the fourth quarter after having slowed in the third quarter, and they generally expected robust growth to continue in 2022. a few participants cited healthy household balance sheets, the need for businesses to rebuild inventory, and accommodative financial conditions as factors supporting continued robust growth. a couple of participants commented that business conditions appeared to be improving broadly, including in sectors providing in-person services, such as the retail, restaurant, and hotel sectors. many participants noted that the emergence of the omicron variant made the economic outlook more uncertain; several remarked that they did not yet see the new variant as fundamentally altering the path of economic recovery in the united states. in their discussion of the household sector, participants generally noted that demand for consumer goods had remained strong, likely supported by accommodative fiscal and monetary policies, increased household income as more people found jobs, increasing net worth of the household sector, and the high level of savings accumulated through the course of the pandemic. participants noted that supply chain bottlenecks and labor shortages continued to limit businesses’ ability to meet strong demand. they judged that these challenges would likely last longer and be more widespread than previously thought. participants generally expected global supply chain bottlenecks to persist well into next year at least. while several participants pointed to signs of incremental improvement in supply chains, a few others remarked that business contacts were experiencing deteriorating supply conditions that could be exacerbated by the emergence of new variants of the virus. a couple of participants reported that some contacts were implementing permanent changes in their business models to help weather current and future disruptions, including holding larger inventories or building domestic manufacturing capacity. many business contacts continued to experience difficulty hiring workers across all skill levels, noting the lack of qualified candidates as well. some participants noted that businesses were offering higher wages, larger bonuses, or more flexible work arrangements to compete for workers. participants judged that labor markets continued to strengthen, with the unemployment rate falling rapidly and payrolls growing at a solid pace. a few participants noted the recent decline in the unemployment rates of african americans and hispanics and the narrowing of the racial and ethnic gap in the prime-age employmentto-population ratio as suggesting a more inclusive labor market recovery. some participants discussed the modest increase in the labor force participation rate in november. a number of participants judged that a substantial improvement in labor force participation would take longer than previously expected. a few others assessed that any further improvement in labor force participation would be quite modest. participants cited a number of pandemic and economic factors likely depressing labor force participation, such as increased caregiving needs amid a shortage of workers in the caregiving industry, remaining concerns about the virus, and healthy balance sheets for households, including for those who retired early. a couple of participants cited factors that could support higher labor force participation over the next few years, including waning fiscal stimulus; depleted savings, particularly for lower-income households; and the historical tendency for labor force participation to lag improvement in the labor market. participants pointed to a number of signs that the u.s. labor market was very tight, including near-record rates page 10 federal open market committee  of quits and job vacancies, as well as a notable pickup in wage growth. in line with the recent data showing a rise in the employment cost index, many participants reported district business contacts either planning or having implemented larger wage increases to retain current employees or attract new workers. participants generally noted that they were monitoring the incoming data for signs of inflationary pressures associated with the increasingly tight labor market. acknowledging that the maximum level of employment consistent with price stability may evolve over time, many participants saw the u.s. economy making rapid progress toward the committee’s maximum-employment goal. several participants viewed labor market conditions as already largely consistent with maximum employment. participants remarked that inflation readings had been higher and were more persistent and widespread than previously anticipated. some participants noted that trimmed mean measures of inflation had reached decade-high levels and that the percentage of product categories with substantial price increases continued to climb. while participants generally continued to anticipate that inflation would decline significantly over the course of 2022 as supply constraints eased, almost all stated that they had revised up their forecasts of inflation for 2022 notably, and many did so for 2023 as well. in discussing their revisions to the inflation outlook, participants pointed to rising housing costs and rents, more widespread wage growth driven by labor shortages, and more prolonged global supply-side frictions, which could be exacerbated by the emergence of the omicron variant. moreover, participants widely cited business contacts feeling confident that they would be able to pass on higher costs of labor and material to customers. participants noted their continuing attention to the public’s concern about the sizable increase in the cost of living that had taken place this year and the associated burden on u.s. households, particularly those who had limited scope to pay higher prices for essential goods and services. in their comments on inflation expectations, some participants discussed the risk that recent elevated levels of inflation could increase the public’s longer-term expectations for inflation to a level above that consistent with the committee’s longer-run inflation objective. they noted that the realization of such a development could make it harder for the committee to achieve 2 percent inflation over the longer run. a couple of participants pointed to reports of higher inflation expectations of businesses and of increased use of cost-of-living adjustments in wage negotiations as early developments that could potentially affect the anchoring of inflation expectations. a few participants, however, noted that longterm inflation expectations remained well anchored, citing stable readings of market-based inflation compensation measures or the generally low level of longer-term bond yields. participants observed that uncertainty about the economic outlook remained high. most agreed that risks to inflation were weighted to the upside. several participants pointed to the possibility that structural factors that kept inflation low in the previous decade, such as technological changes, demographics, and the proximity of the elb in an environment of low equilibrium interest rates, may reemerge when the effects of the pandemic abate. a couple of others noted the risk that persistent real wage growth in excess of productivity growth could trigger inflationary wage–price dynamics. participants generally continued to stress uncertainties associated with the labor market—in particular, the evolution of labor force participation—and with the length of time required to resolve the supply chain situation. many participants noted that the pandemic, particularly new variants of the virus, continued to pose downside risks to economic activity and upside risks to inflation. in their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants reaffirmed the federal reserve’s commitment to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy during this challenging time, thereby promoting the committee’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. participants discussed the progress the economy had made toward the criteria the committee had specified in its forward guidance for the federal funds rate. participants agreed that the committee’s criteria of inflation rising to 2 percent and moderately exceeding 2 percent for some time had been more than met. all participants remarked that inflation had continued to run notably above 2 percent, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy. with respect to the maximum-employment criterion, participants noted that the labor market had been making rapid progress as measured by a variety of indicators, including solid job gains reported in recent months, a substantial further decline in a range of unemployment rates to levels well below those prevailing a year ago, and a labor force participation rate that had recently edged up. many participants judged that, if the current pace of improvement continued, labor markets would fast approach maximum employment. several participants remarked that they viewed labor market conditions as already largely consistent with maximum employment. minutes of the meeting of december 14–15, 2021 page 11  in support of the committee’s goals of maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, participants judged that it would be appropriate for the committee to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment, a condition most participants judged could be met relatively soon if the recent pace of labor market improvements continued. a few participants remarked that maximum employment consistent with price stability evolves over time and that further improvements in labor markets were likely over subsequent years as the economy continued to expand. some participants also remarked that there could be circumstances in which it would be appropriate for the committee to raise the target range for the federal funds rate before maximum employment had been fully achieved—for example, if the committee judged that its employment and price-stability goals were not complementary in light of economic developments and that inflation pressures and inflation expectations were moving materially and persistently higher in a way that could impede the attainment of the committee’s longer-run goals. in light of elevated inflation pressures and the strengthening labor market, participants judged that the increase in policy accommodation provided by the ongoing pace of net asset purchases was no longer necessary. they remarked that a quicker conclusion of net asset purchases would better position the committee to set policy to address the full range of plausible economic outcomes. participants judged that it would be appropriate to double the pace of the ongoing reduction in net asset purchases. such a change would result in reducing the monthly pace of net purchases of treasury securities by $20 billion and of agency mbs by $10 billion starting in january. participants also expected that economic conditions would evolve in a manner such that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases would be appropriate each subsequent month, resulting in an end to net asset purchases in mid-march, a few months sooner than participants had anticipated at the november fomc meeting. in addition, participants remarked that the committee should continue to be prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. participants continued to stress that maintaining flexibility to implement appropriate policy adjustments on the basis of risk-management considerations should be a guiding principle in conducting policy in the current highly uncertain environment. participants generally noted that, given their individual outlooks for the economy, the labor market, and inflation, it may become warranted to increase the federal funds rate sooner or at a faster pace than participants had earlier anticipated. some participants also noted that it could be appropriate to begin to reduce the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet relatively soon after beginning to raise the federal funds rate. some participants judged that a less accommodative future stance of policy would likely be warranted and that the committee should convey a strong commitment to address elevated inflation pressures. these participants noted, however, that a measured approach to tightening policy would help enable the committee to assess incoming data and be in position to react to the full range of plausible economic outcomes. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. they noted that the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but continued to be affected by covid-19. job gains had been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. they remarked that supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy had continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members also acknowledged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints were expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation, but risks to the economic outlook remained, including from new variants of the virus. as elevated inflation had persisted for longer than they had previously anticipated, members agreed that it was appropriate to remove the reference to “transitory” factors affecting inflation in the postmeeting statement and instead note that supply and demand imbalances have continued to contribute to elevated inflation. members also agreed that, with the emergence of the omicron variant, it was appropriate to note the risk of new variants of the virus in their assessment of risks to the economic outlook. page 12 federal open market committee  members agreed that the federal reserve was committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. all members reaffirmed their commitment to seek to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. members agreed that the postmeeting statement should be updated to reflect the committee’s assessment of the progress the economy had made toward the criteria specified in its forward guidance for the target range for the federal funds rate. they agreed that the inflation criteria in the guidance had been met and that the postmeeting statement should note that with inflation having exceeded 2 percent for some time, the committee expected that it would be appropriate to maintain the current target range of 0 to ¼ percent until labor market conditions had reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment. in light of inflation developments and the further improvement in the labor market, members decided to reduce the monthly pace of the federal reserve’s net asset purchases by $20 billion for treasury securities and $10 billion for agency mbs. specifically, beginning in january, the committee would increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $40 billion per month and of agency mbs by at least $20 billion per month. members also agreed that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases would likely be appropriate in subsequent months, implying that increases in the federal reserve’s securities holdings would cease by mid-march under the committee’s outlook, a few months sooner than had been anticipated at the previous meeting. members noted that the committee was prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook and that it was important to maintain the flexibility to adjust the stance of policy as appropriate in response to changes in the committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation. members also noted that the federal reserve’s ongoing asset purchases and holdings of securities would continue to foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. they also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the system open market account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective december 16, 2021, the federal open market committee directs the desk to:  undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent.  complete the increase in system open market account (soma) holdings of treasury securities by $60 billion and of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) by $30 billion, as indicated in the monthly purchase plans released in mid-december.  increase the soma holdings of treasury securities by $40 billion and of agency mbs by $20 billion, during the monthly purchase period beginning in mid-january.  increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities.  conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s minutes of the meeting of december 14–15, 2021 page 13  holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs.  allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “the federal reserve is committed to using its full range of tools to support the u.s. economy in this challenging time, thereby promoting its maximum employment and price stability goals. with progress on vaccinations and strong policy support, indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months but continue to be affected by covid-19. job gains have been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined substantially. supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints are expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation. risks to the economic outlook remain, including from new variants of the virus. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. with inflation having exceeded 2 percent for some time, the committee expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the committee’s assessments of maximum employment. in light of inflation developments and the further improvement in the labor market, the committee decided to reduce the monthly pace of its net asset purchases by $20 billion for treasury securities and $10 billion for agency mortgage-backed securities. beginning in january, the committee will increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $40 billion per month and of agency mortgage-backed securities by at least $20 billion per month. the committee judges that similar reductions in the pace of net asset purchases will likely be appropriate each month, but it is prepared to adjust the pace of purchases if warranted by changes in the economic outlook. the federal reserve’s ongoing purchases and holdings of securities will continue to foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, thomas i. barkin, raphael w. bostic, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, richard h. clarida, mary c. daly, charles l. evans, randal k. quarles, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective december 16, 2021. the board also voted unanimously to approve establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent, effective december 16, 2021. page 14 federal open market committee  at the end of the meeting, the chair noted that the board’s staff had made substantial progress in developing formal polices to implement the tough and comprehensive ethics rules for senior officials that were announced in october. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, january 25–26, 2022. the meeting adjourned at 11:00 a.m. on december 15, 2021. notation vote by notation vote completed on november 23, 2021, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on november 2–3, 2021.  james a. clouse secretary 
e january 26, 2022 chair powell. good afternoon. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. today, in support of these goals, the federal open market committee kept its policy interest rate near zero and stated its expectation that an increase in this rate would soon be appropriate. the committee also agreed to continue reducing its net asset purchases on the schedule we announced in december—bringing them to an end in early march. as i will explain, against a backdrop of elevated inflation and a strong labor market, our policy has been adapting to the evolving economic environment, and it will continue to do so. economic activity expanded at a robust pace last year, reflecting progress on vaccinations and the reopening of the economy, fiscal and monetary policy support, and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. indeed, the economy has shown great strength and resilience in the face of the ongoing pandemic. the recent sharp rise in covid cases associated with the omicron variant will surely weigh on economic growth this quarter. high-frequency indicators point to reduced spending in covid-sensitive sectors, such as travel and restaurants. and activity more broadly may also be affected as many workers are unable to report for work because of illness, quarantines, or caregiving needs. fortunately, health experts are finding that the omicron variant has not been as virulent as previous strains of the virus, and they expect that cases will drop off rapidly. if the wave passes quickly, the economic effects should as well, and we would see a return to strong growth. that said, the implications for the economy remain uncertain. and we have not lost sight of the  fact that for many afflicted individuals and families, and for the health-care workers on the front lines, the virus continues to cause great hardship. the labor market has made remarkable progress and, by many measures, is very strong. job gains have been solid in recent months, averaging 365,000 per month over the past three months. over the past year, payroll employment has risen by 6.4 million jobs. the unemployment rate has declined sharply, falling 2 percentage points over the past six months to reach 3.9 percent in december. the improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution, as well as for african americans and hispanics. labor demand remains historically strong. with constraints on labor supply, employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at their fastest pace in many years. while labor force participation has edged up, it remains subdued, in part reflecting the aging of the population and retirements. in addition, some who would otherwise would be seeking work report that they are out of the labor force because of factors related to the pandemic, including caregiving needs and ongoing concerns about the virus. the current wave of the virus may well prolong these effects. over time, there are good reasons to expect some further improvements in participation and employment. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and [to] the reopening of the economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. in particular, bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond to higher demand in the near term. these problems have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, exacerbated by waves of the virus.  while the drivers of higher inflation have been predominantly connected to the dislocations caused by the pandemic, price increases have now spread to a broader range of goods and services. wages have also risen briskly, and we are attentive to the risks that persistent real wage growth in excess of productivity [growth] could put upward pressure on inflation. like most forecasters, we continue to expect inflation to decline over the course of the year. we understand that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. in addition, we believe that the best thing we can do to support continued labor market gains is to promote a long expansion, and that will require price stability. we are committed to our price-stability goal. we will use our tools both to support the economy and a strong labor market and to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched. and we’ll be watching carefully to see whether the economy is evolving in line with expectations. the fed’s monetary policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. as i noted, the committee left the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged and reaffirmed our plan, announced in december, to end asset purchases in early march. in light of the remarkable progress we’ve seen in the labor market and inflation that is well above our 2 percent longer-run goal, the economy no longer needs sustained high levels of monetary policy support. that is why we are phasing out our asset purchases and why we expect it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. of course, the economic outlook remains highly uncertain. making appropriate monetary policy in this environment requires humility, recognizing that the economy evolves in  unexpected ways. we’ll need to be nimble so that we can respond to the full range of plausible outcomes. with this in mind, we will remain attentive to risks, including the risk that high inflation is more persistent than expected, and are prepared to respond as appropriate to achieve our goals. to provide greater clarity about our approach for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, today the committee issued a set of principles that will provide a foundation for our future decisions. [in] these high-level principles, [we] clarify that the federal funds rate is our primary means of adjusting monetary policy and that reducing our balance sheet will occur after the process of raising interest rates has begun. reductions will occur over time in a predictable manner primarily through adjustments to reinvestments so that securities roll off our balance sheet. over time, we intend to hold securities in the amounts needed for our ample- reserves operating framework, and in the longer run, we envision holding primarily treasury securities. our decisions to reduce our balance sheet will be guided by our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. in that regard, we will be prepared to adjust any of the details of our approach to balance sheet management in light of economic and financial developments. the committee has not made decisions regarding the specific timing, pace, or other details of shrinking the balance sheet. and we will discuss these matters in upcoming meetings and provide additional information at the appropriate time. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the federal reserve will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price- stability goals. thank you. i look forward to your questions.  michelle smith. thank you. for the first question, we’ll go to chris rugaber at the associated press. christopher rugaber. thanks, michelle. and thank you, chair powell. so it’s expected that the fed will hike rates perhaps every other meeting, but certainly in the past, the fed has hiked at every meeting. so i just wanted to ask, you know, are rate hikes at consecutive meetings on the table this year? is every meeting a live—a live meeting? and, on that note, would the fed consider front-loading some of its rate hikes, even if it doesn’t raise at every meeting? thank you. chair powell. thanks. so, as i—as i referred to in my opening statement, it’s—it is not possible to predict with much confidence exactly what path for our policy rate is going to prove appropriate. and so, at this time, we haven’t made any decisions about the path of policy. and i stress again that we’ll be humble and nimble. we’re going to have to navigate crosscurrents and actually two-sided risks now. so—and, and i’ll say also that we’re going to be guided by the data. in fact, what i’ll say is that we’re going to be led by the incoming data and the evolving outlook, which we’ll try to communicate as clearly as possible, moving steadily and transparency—transparently. so more to your question, we know that the economy is in a very different place than it was when we began raising rates in 2015. specifically, the economy is now much stronger. the labor market is far stronger. inflation is running well above our 2 percent target, much higher than it was at that time. and these differences are likely to have important implications for the appropriate pace of policy adjustments. beyond that, we haven’t made any decisions. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to victoria guida at politico.  victoria guida. hi, chair powell. i wanted to ask, you were talking about the health of the labor market. and i’m curious whether you would characterize where we’re at right now as maximum employment. and also, along those same lines, obviously rate hikes [are] on the table this year, do you think that the fed can raise rates, bring inflation under control without hurting jobs and wages? chair powell. sorry. just getting both, both parts of your question written down. so i would say—and this view is widely held on the committee—that both sides of the mandate are calling for us to move steadily away from the very highly accommodative policies we put in place during the challenging economic conditions that the economy faced earlier in the pandemic. and i would say that most fomc participants agree that labor market conditions are consistent with maximum employment in the sense of the highest level of employment that is consistent with price stability. and that is—that is my personal view. and, and, again, very broad support on the committee for the judgment that it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. the other thing is, maximum employment will, will evolve over time and through the course of the business cycle. in the particular situation we’re in now, it may well increase. max—the level of maximum—of employment that’s consistent with stable prices may increase. and we hope that it will, as more people come back into the labor market, as participation gradually rises. and the policy path that we’re broadly contemplating would be supportive of that comment—that outcome as well. so the thing about the labor market right now is that there are—there are many millions of, of more job openings than there are unemployed people. so you ask whether we can— whether we can raise rates and, and move to less accommodative, and even tight, financial  conditions without hurting the labor market. i think there’s quite a bit of room to raise interest rates without threatening the labor market. this is, by so many measures, a historically tight labor market. record levels of job openings, of quits. wages are moving up at the highest pace they have in decades. if you look at surveys of workers, they find jobs plentiful. look at surveys of companies—they find workers scarce. and all of those readings are at levels, really, that we haven’t seen in a long time—and, in some cases, ever. so this is a very, very strong labor market, and my strong sense is that we can—we can—we can move rates up without, without having to, you know, severely undermine it. i also would point out that there are—there are other forces at work this year, which should also help bring down inflation, we hope, including improvement on the supply side, which will ultimately come. the timing and pace of that are uncertain. and also, fiscal policy is going to be less supportive of, of growth this year—not of the level of economic activity, but the fiscal impulse to growth will be significantly lower. so there are multiple forces—which should be working over the course of the year for inflation to come down. we do realize that the timing and pace of that are, are highly uncertain and that inflation has persisted longer than we—than we thought. and, of course, we’re prepared to use our tools to assure that higher inflation does not become entrenched. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to nick timiraos at the wall street journal. nick timiraos. good afternoon, chair powell. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. i, i have a couple of questions on the balance sheet. the statement on the balance sheet today calls for “significantly reducing” your holdings. what does that mean? and then, apart from moving sooner and faster to shrink the holdings, are there any other ways in which you and your colleagues are seriously thinking about recalibrating this process? and, finally, how much  disagreement is there around how you should use this tool, including active sales rather than passive sales or changes in the composition of reinvestments? thank you. chair powell. so i’m afraid to tell you that those are all great questions, and they’re questions that the committee is just turning to now. so we had—we had a discussion, as you know, at the last meeting, an introductory discussion of the balance sheet and a teeing up of the issues. at this meeting, we’ve gone through and carefully put together a set of principles at a high level. and those are meant to guide the actual decisions we’ll make about the pace and about all of the questions that you’re, you’re asking. and i expect that this process will, will be something that we spend time on in coming meetings. i can’t tell you how many. i can’t tell you how long it will take. but—and then, you know, at the appropriate time, we’ll provide additional information. so i did—the last cycle when we—when we went through balance sheet issues, we did find that over, over the course of two or three meetings, for example, we did come to interesting and better answers, we thought. so we’re just in that process now. and at the next meeting, we’ll be turning to, you know, more of the details that you’re—that you’re asking about. i would say this. the balance sheet is, is much bigger. i’d say it has a shorter duration than the last time. and the economy’s much stronger, and inflation is much higher. so—and i think that leads you to—and i said, i’ve said this—being willing to move sooner than we did the last time and also perhaps faster. but beyond that, it’s really—it’s really not appropriate for me to speculate exactly what that would be. and, and—but i would point you to principle number one, which is “the committee views changes in the target range for the federal funds rate as its primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy.” so we do want the federal funds rate—we, we want to operationalize that [as the primary means]. and we want the balance sheet  to be declining in a predictable manner, and we want it to be declining primarily by adjusting reinvestments. nick timiraos. so, if i could follow on that, raising rates and reducing the balance sheet both restrain the economy, both tighten monetary policy. how should we think about the relationship between the two? for example, how much passive runoff is equal to every ¼ percentage point increase in your benchmark rate? chair powell. so, again, we think of the balance sheet as, as moving in a predictable manner, sort of in the background, and that the active tool meeting to meeting is not both of them, it’s the federal funds rate. there are—there are rules of thumb—i’m reluctant to land on one of them—that, that equate this. and—but there’s also an element of, of uncertainty around the balance sheet. i think we have a much better sense, frankly, of how rate increases affect financial conditions and, hence, economic conditions. balance sheet [policy] is, is still a relatively new thing for, for the markets and for us, so we’re less certain about that. so, again, our—i think our—the pattern we’ll follow is to—is to arrive at a, you know, a timing and a pace and composition and all those things and then announce that with advance notice, and, and it will—it will start in the background. and then we’ll look to have that just running in the background and have—and have the interest rates, again, be the active tool of monetary policy. that’s, that’s at least the plan. i can’t tell you much more about any of the— any of the very good issues about size, pace, composition, those sorts of things. but we’ll be turning to all of those at coming meetings. nick timiraos. thank you. michelle smith. thanks. now we’ll go to neil irwin.  neil irwin. thank you, chair powell. it’s neil irwin from axios. glad to be back. sir, i was wondering if the volatility we’ve seen in financial markets in the last few weeks strikes you as anything alarming or that might affect the trajectory of policy. conversely, to the degree that financial conditions have tightened some, might that be desirable in some ways in achieving your, your tightening goals? chair powell. so, as you know, the ultimate focus that we have is on the real economy: maximum employment and price stability. and financial conditions matter to the extent that they have implications for achieving the dual mandate. and you also know that we, we look at broader financial conditions, not one or two things, one or two markets. and what we’re always asking ourselves is, are we seeing changes that are both persistent and material enough that—of a change in financial conditions—that they are inconsistent with the achievement of our goals? so that’s how we’re looking at that. and i don’t want to comment on today’s financial conditions broadly, but we’re not looking at any one market or, or so. so that’s how we’re thinking. in terms of what we’ve seen, i would say this. we, you know, we said at our last meeting we published the summary of economic projections, the median of which—the median participant expected three rate increases this year. and, you know, it’s six weeks, seven weeks later now. and you have seen that our communication channel with the markets is working. markets are, are now pricing in a number of rate increases. surveys show that market participants are expecting a balance sheet runoff to begin, you know, at the appropriate time, sometime later this year perhaps. we haven’t made that decision yet. so we, we feel like the communications we have with market participants and with the general public are working and  that financial conditions are reflecting in advance the decisions that we make. and monetary policy works significantly through expectations. so that, that in and of itself is appropriate. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to howard schneider. howard schneider. you know, for a year or so—hi. thanks, chair powell. howard schneider with reuters. so for a year now, the statements referenced the benchmarks for this initial interest rate increase. now that we’re approaching that moment, what are the benchmarks going to be for subsequent rate increases? i know you can’t stipulate the path, but how should we think about the criteria for the next step and the next step? chair powell. well, you’re right. we haven’t got—we haven’t gotten to that point yet. we haven’t made a decision yet, and we’ll make that decision at the march meeting. we’ll make a decision whether to raise the federal funds rate. i would say that the committee is, is of a mind to, to raise the federal funds rate at the march meeting, assuming that conditions are appropriate for doing so. we have—we have our eyes on, on the risks, particularly around the world. but we do expect some softening in the economy from omicron, but we think that that should be temporary. and we think that the economy should—the underlying strength of the economy should, you know, should, should—show through fairly quickly after that. howard schneider. if i could follow just on a related question, the december seps had this copacetic sort of set of circumstances where inflation comes down without the federal funds rate ever getting over the estimate of neutral. given developments since then, do you still think that’s a credible narrative for the ultimate path of policy? chair powell. i think the path is highly uncertain and that we’re committed to using our tools to make sure that inflation, high inflation that we’re seeing, does not become entrenched. so a number of factors would be—it’s not just monetary policy—a number of  factors are supporting a decline in inflation, as i mentioned. fiscal policy will be—will provide significantly less of an impulse to growth. we do expect this year—although we do expect now that it will come slower than, than we had expected and hoped—that there will be relief on the supply side. so that, too, should—should lower the supply-side barriers, which are a big part of the story of why inflation is high. in addition, monetary policy will be becoming significantly less accommodative. so the question is—you know, we’ll, we’ll be asking this question all year long, and that will be, are things turning out as we expect? there’s a case that, for whatever reason, the economy slows more and inflation slows more than expected; we’ll react to that. if, instead, we see inflation at a higher level or a more persistent level, then we’ll react to that. and, again, we’re, we’re well aware that this is a different economy than—than existed during the last tightening cycle, and our policy is going to reflect those differences. howard schneider. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to jeanna smialek. let’s go to jeanna. [no response] okay. let’s go to steve liesman. steve liesman. thank you, michelle. and thank you, mr. chairman. mr. chairman, i have one sort of technical question and one question on principle. the technical question is, if, if you’re going to discuss balance sheet at the next upcoming meetings and you won’t begin balance sheet reduction until after you begin rate hikes, it seems to technically mean that you won’t or can’t begin balance sheet reduction until the summer. is that correct? that’s the first thing. second of all, you suggested that, that the—with balance sheet running in the background—that you would possibly be raising rates and running off the balance sheet at the  same time. that’s sort of the technical question part of it. the principal question i have is, you said it’s going to be running in the background. but the statement on the balance sheet principles says “the committee is prepared to adjust any of the details of its approach” based on “economic and financial developments,” which suggests there’s something of a reaction function associated to the balance sheet and it won’t be running in the background. so can you give us any sense of the discussion or staff presentation on what is the reaction function surrounding the balance sheet? thanks. chair powell. so let me—let me—let me start by talking about that last paragraph. so you’ll remember during the last cycle that this process of building up and then shrinking the balance sheet is a complicated one, and it involves, inevitably, surprises. and so during, during the years, during the prior cycle, we amended our balance sheet principles a number of times. now, we didn’t intend to do that. it just—events required us to do so. so we got a pretty robust paragraph there that says we’re free to do this at any time. and it doesn’t mean we’re going to, but if the situation turns out to be different than we had thought, we’re not going to be—we’re not going to stick with something that isn’t working. that’s all that’s saying. it’s meant to be quite a general statement rather than a, a hint. so, i mean, i like to think that our, you know, our philosophy of the balance sheet is, is embodied in these principles. so, you know, the idea that, for example, the federal funds rate is the primary means of adjusting the stance of policy, that we’ll use—determine the timing and pace of reducing the size of the balance sheet to foster the dual mandate, that we’ll begin to reduce the size after we begin the process of raising rates, and on and on like that. i mean, that— those are all the things that, that try to describe how we will proceed.  but maybe at a higher level, to try to get at your question: you know, asset purchases were, were enormously important at the beginning of the recovery in terms of restoring market function, as they were at—right after the—in the critical phase of the global financial crisis. and then after [that], they were a macroeconomic tool to support demand. and now the economy no longer needs this, this highly accommodative policy that we put in place. so it’s time to stop asset purchases first and then, at the appropriate time, start to shrink the balance sheet. now, the balance sheet is, is substantially larger than it needs to be. we’ve identified the end state as—in amounts needed to implement monetary policy efficiently [and] effectively in the ample-reserves regime. so there’s a substantial amount of, of shrinkage in the balance sheet to be done. that’s going to take some time. we want that process to be orderly and predictable. and so those are some of the ways that i would think this, this lays out our, you know, the way we—the way we’re thinking about this. in terms of the timing, i can’t really help you. you know, it just says after, after we get under way. so we’re—i would say we are, we’re going to have another discussion at, at the next meeting. and my guess is, we’ll have at least one other discussion at the meeting after that. and, you know, we’ll, we’ll tell you as we make progress. and we’ll, you know, we’ll start the process of allowing runoff and shrinking the balance sheet at what we find to be the appropriate time. it’s—i wish i could say more. but, honestly, we haven’t made those decisions. and we actually haven’t even really had the, the important discussions on a lot of the details that we will have at coming meetings. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to craig torres. craig torres. chair powell, chair powell. good afternoon, michelle and chair powell. craig torres from bloomberg. chair powell, at the beginning of the conversation, you  said risks are two sided. and i’m wondering if you can elaborate on what are the risks to the elusive soft landing. is fed policy a risk? overtightening? or what are the risks? and then second, chair powell, i have a quick administrative question. you know, robert kaplan’s disclosure of his securities transactions—and in a couple of months, chair powell, or maybe sooner, you and i will file our tax returns. and we’ll list transactions and all kinds of things. and next to those transactions, we’ll put dates. and bloomberg asked for the dates of mr. kaplan’s transactions. the dallas fed is not giving us the dates. and i don’t see why this is a matter for the inspector general or anybody else. i mean, why can’t he give us the dates? will you help us get the dates of those transactions? thanks. chair powell. so you asked about the risks first. so i—you know, the one risk is that inflation risks are still to the upside in the views of most fomc participants and, certainly, in my view as well. there’s a risk that, that the high inflation we’re seeing will be prolonged, and there’s a risk that it will move even higher. so we don’t—we don’t think that’s the base case, but you asked what the risks are. and that’s—we have to be in a position with our monetary policy to address all of the plausible outcomes. and that calls for us to be in position. we, we have an expectation about the way the economy is going to be evolved, but we’ve got to be in a position to, to address different outcomes, including the one where inflation remains higher. and, of course, that is a risk to the—to the—to the expansion. you know, we’ve been saying that what we need here is another long expansion, which is the kind of thing we saw over the last [one], which was a record long expansion. we saw labor force participation rise. we saw wages persistently higher for people at the lower end, and there, there really was no obvious  imbalance in the economy that threatened that expansion. it could have gone on for years were it not hit by the pandemic. so we’d love to find a way to get back to that. that’s going to require price stability, and that’s going to require the fed to tighten interest rate policy and do our part in getting inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. so i mentioned two-sided risks. you know, a couple things. one, omi—covid is not over. and covid can continue to evolve, and it’s just—we have to accept that it’s not over, and the risks to it can slow down growth. and that would be—that’s sort of a downside risk from a growth standpoint. i would point to—you know, another, another risk is just further, further problems in the supply chains, which could slow down activity. and you see the situation in china as a situation there where that’s—their no-covid policy may cause more lockdowns, is likely to, and that may play into—may play into more problems in supply chains. in addition, there’s what’s going on in eastern europe and things like that. so there’s plenty of risk out there. and we, you know, we can’t—we can’t forget that there are risks on both sides. so that’s, that’s there. that’s what i would say. i know you’ve been all over this issue with, with my colleagues, craig, on the issue of, of information. we don’t—we don’t have that information at the board. and, you know, i hand— i asked the inspector general to do an investigation, and that is out of my hands. i play no role in it. i seek to play no role in it. and i don’t—i really—i can’t help you here today on this issue. and i’m sorry i can’t. craig torres. okay, okay. michelle smith. thank you. we’ll go to jeanna now.  jeanna smialek. thanks for taking our questions, chair powell. and sorry for my tech issues. i wonder if you could tell us a little bit about where your thinking on inflation stands today. you know, the last time we saw an sep back in september, we saw that you and your colleagues were projecting that inflation would sort of sink back down quite close to target by the end of the year. and i wonder if you still think that projection from december is a reasonable one. and if your thinking has changed at all, i wonder how you’re thinking about that. and i also wonder if you could talk a little bit about the pathway to getting to that deceleration. like, how do—how do we get from here, 7 percent cpi, to where you expect to be at the end of the year? chair powell. so i’d say, you know, since, since the december meeting, i would say that the inflation situation is about the same but probably slightly worse. i’d be inclined to raise my own estimate of 2022 core pce inflation—let’s just go with that—by a few tenths today. but we’re not writing, writing down an sep at this meeting. but i think it’s—it hasn’t gotten better. it’s probably gotten just a—just a bit worse, and that’s been the pattern. that’s been the pattern. so i think if you look at the—the fomc participants are—there’s a range there. and that range has been moving to the right for, for a year now. and, by the way, if you look at other forecasters, essentially all other macro forecasters who do this for a living, you’ve seen the same pattern. so, what do we think about that? well, i think we, you know, we wrote down rate increases in the december meetings, each of us individually. and i think to the extent the situation deteriorates further, our policy will have to address that, if it deteriorates meaningfully further, either in the time dimension or in the size of the inflation dimension. so that’s how we’re thinking about it.  i—as i mentioned, though, i think it’s—part of this will be that us, the fed, moving away from a very highly accommodative policy to a substantially less accommodative policy and then, over time, to a policy that’s not accommodative, in time. i don’t know when that will be. that’s—those are the things that we’re—that we’re thinking about. that’s, that’s part of it. another part of it is that fiscal policy provided an impulse to growth over the last two years. that impulse will be less, in fact, will be—will be negative this year. and so that’s another thing. the other one is, we will eventually get relief on the supply side. and, you know, the ports will be cleared up. and there will be semiconductors and things like that. now, what we’re learning is, it’s just taking much longer, so i think—longer than expected. and that, i think, does raise, raise the risk that high inflation will be more persistent. i do think we’ll come off of the highs that we saw in the early part of this episode in the—in the spring last year. but, really, what’s—the question is going to be, what is inflation running at? and so we’ll be watching that. and i, you know, we—our objective is to get inflation back down to 2 percent. it’s also to provide enough support to keep the labor market healthy. the labor market is very, very strong right now, and i think that that strength will continue. there’s a—there’s really a shortage of workers. we see it particularly among production and nonsupervisory workers and people in the lowest quartile. you see very large wage increases. i mentioned some of the other indicators. so i think that’s, that’s what we’re looking at. and we’re also—you know, we realize, i think, as everyone does, that this outlook is quite uncertain and that we’re going to have to adapt. and we’re going to communicate as clearly as we can. but we’re going to have to be adaptable and, you know, move, move as appropriate. jeanna smialek. great. thank you.  michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to colby smith. colby smith. thank you, michelle. chair powell, when you talk about being humble and nimble about the path forward for monetary policy, does that also include the possibility of raising interest rates by larger increments and, say, doing a 50 basis point hike at some point if inflation does not moderate sufficiently? and should we interpret this approach as a departure from the gradual pace that we saw during the last hiking cycle? chair powell. so, as i mentioned, we have not made these decisions. we really haven’t. and, and what i can tell you now, though, is that we fully appreciate that this is a different situation. if you look back to where we were in 2015, ’16, ’17, ’18 when we were raising rates, inflation was very close to 2 percent, even below 2 percent. unemployment was, was not at our estimates of the natural rate. and growth was, you know, in the 2 to 3 percent range. right now, we have inflation running substantially above 2 percent and, and, you know, more persistently than we would like. we have growth—even in forecasts, even in the somewhat reduced forecast for 2022—we still see growth higher than, substantially higher than what we estimate to be the potential growth rate. and we see a labor market where, by so many measures, it is historically tight. i think the—you know, in a way, the least tight aspect of it is, is looking at the unemployment rate, which is still below our median estimate of, of [the unemployment rate consistent with] maximum employment. if you look at things like quits and job openings, as i mentioned earlier, and wages, you’re seeing—and, and just the ratio of job openings to unemployed—you’re seeing a very, very tight labor market. now, we also know that labor force participation is significantly lower. it’s 1½ percentage points lower than it was in february of 2020. maybe a [full] percentage point of  that is, is retirements. some part of those retirements are, are, you know, related to covid rather than just regular retirements. so we think there’s, there’s a pool of people out there who could come back into the labor force. but it’s not happening very quickly, and it may not—it may continue to not happen very quickly as long as the pandemic is on[going]. so that’s, that’s, that’s how we think about that. we haven’t made—to your specific question—we really have not addressed those questions. and we’ll begin to address them as we—as we move into the march meeting and meetings after that. michelle smith. let’s go to rachel. rachel siegel. thank you, michelle. and thank you, chair powell, for taking our questions. i’m wondering if you can talk to us about any metrics that the fed uses to assess how inflation affects different groups of americans, especially lower-, lower-income earners? and are you worried that the fed underestimates, or can’t effectively measure, the impact of inflation on some of the most vulnerable households? thank you. chair powell. so it’s, it’s more a matter of—i think the problem that we’re—that we’re talking about here is really that people who are on fixed incomes who are living paycheck to paycheck, they’re spending most or all of their—of, of what they’re earning on food, gasoline, rent, heating their—heating, things like that, basic necessities. and so inflation right away, right away forces people like that to make very difficult decisions. so that’s really the point. i don’t—i’m not aware of, you know, inflation literally falling more on, on different socioeconomic groups. it’s—that’s not the point. the point is, some people are just really in a—prone to suffer more. i mean, for people who are economically well off, inflation isn’t good. it’s bad. high inflation is, is bad, but they’re going to be able to continue to eat and keep their homes and drive  their cars and things like that. it’s more—so that, that’s really how i think of it. and, you know, we, we have to control inflation for the benefit of all americans. but part of—part of it is just that it’s particularly hard on people with fixed incomes and low incomes who spent most of their—of their income on necessities, which are—which are experiencing high inflation now. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to edward lawrence. edward lawrence. thanks, michelle, and thank you, mr. chairman, for taking the question here. so year over year, inflation’s at a 40-year high. the [increase in] input costs for producer price index for all of 2021 was the highest on record. some investors fear that the fed might be moving too late. now, you said no decisions were made on the path of rate hikes, but was a rate hike more than 25 basis points discussed today? and as a follow to that—because i have problems with the mute button—as a follow to that, you testified that the supply chain issues could be worked out by the end of the year. you talked about that today. the ceo of ford, though, told fox business today that the chip shortage will last into 2023. so today you said inflation will start to ease this year. i want to drill down and get a timeline that you see as to when we could see that relief. thank you. chair powell. so i, i would not say that i would expect the supply chain issues to be completely worked out by the end of this year. i do not expect them, and i have not expected them. what i would say, and i have been saying, is that i expect progress to be made in the second half of this year, mainly—progress because we’re not making much progress. if you look at a ton of metrics, you can find some that suggest that delivery times are shorter and inventories in some industries moving up. but, overall, we’re not—we’re not making progress. and, you know, things like the semiconductor issue are going to—they’re going to be quite a long time. i would think they’ll go more than through 2023.  in terms of—so in terms of being too late, i would just say this. we—our policy needs to be positioned to address the full range of plausible outcomes, as i said, and particularly the possibility that inflation will continue to run higher, more persistently than we’d expected. and we think we are positioned to make the changes in our policy to do that, and, and we’re committed to doing that. and that’s, that’s really where we are. in terms of your, your question about the, the size of rate increases, we haven’t—we haven’t faced those decisions. we haven’t made them. it isn’t possible to sit down here today and tell you with any confidence what the—what the precise path will be. but in—as we work our way through this, meeting by meeting, we are aware that this is a very different, different expansion, as i’ve said a couple times, with higher inflation, higher growth, a much stronger economy. and i think those differences are likely to be reflected in—in the policy that we implement. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to mike mckee. michael mckee. thank you, mr. chairman. i’d like to sort of weave some of the strands of your answers together and ask you, as you start to reverse policy, what your goal is. are you going to be raising interest rates until you get inflation to 2 percent? do you want to go below 2 percent so that, on average, you get a 2 percent inflation rate? and because you said we have to protect the employment part of your mandate, is there some sort of circuit breaker that would stop you from raising interest rates on the employment side? chair powell. so, no. there’s no—there’s nothing in our framework about having inflation run below 2 percent so that we would do that, try to achieve that outcome. so the answer to that is, is “no.” what we’re trying to do is get inflation, keep inflation expectations well anchored at 2 percent. that’s, that’s always the, the ultimate goal. and we do that in the  service of having inflation—we get to that goal by having inflation average 2 percent over time. and if inflation doesn’t average 2 percent over time, then it’s not clear why inflation expectations would be anchored at 2 percent. so that, that’s the way we think about that. you know, it—what was the last part of your—of your question? michael mckee. i was asking if you’re protecting the employment side of the mandate, whether there’s some sort of circuit breaker there. chair powell. nothing like that. i mean, i would say you have a tremendously strong labor market. and you have growth this year at—forecast to be well above—well above potential. i mean, people who are forecasting growth think potential growth is around 2 [percent]. most forecasts [of actual growth] are significantly above that for 2022, and that’s even with, with policy becoming substantially less accommodative. so the labor market’s going to be strong for some time. we’re—ideally, what we’re trying to achieve is inflation getting back down to 2 percent. and we’re trying to do that in a process that, that, that accomplishes—you know, that will also leave the labor market in a very strong position. and no one really knows what that will take. again, i would say that it isn’t just monetary policy that’s helping inflation get down. it’ll be supply-side improvements, and it’ll be less, less fiscal, you know, less fiscal impulse in all likelihood. so—but monetary policy will do our job. it is our job to get inflation down to 2 percent. and a situation where, where the two goals are—the two goals can be in tension is a difficult one. but i—but i don’t really think they are here, though, because i think a really significant threat to further strengthening in the labor market in the form of higher participation over time is high inflation. and also, high inflation is taking away the benefits of some of these larger wage  increases that we’re seeing now. so we do hope to achieve, and our plan is to achieve, both of those goals. michael mckee. if i could—if i could follow up, does the danger of tightening too much as policy works its way into the economy with a lag mean that you should go back to being more forecast dependent in making decisions, rather than the state dependency you’ve been using as a framework for the last year and a half or so? chair powell. state dependency was particularly around the thought that if we—if we saw a very strong labor market, we would wait to see actual inflation—actual inflation before we tightened. and so that was a very state-dependent thought because, for a long time, we’d been tightening on the expectation of high inflation, which never appeared. and that was the case for, for a number of years. so in this particular situation, we will be clearly monitoring incoming data as well as the evolving outlook. michelle smith. let’s go to michael derby. michael derby. thank you for taking my question. i want to ask you, with the benefit of hindsight, and i realize, i mean, that is what it is. but do you feel that, you know, monetary policy and fiscal policy maybe did too much to react to the crisis and that part of the inflation problem that we’re having right now is because the government response, you know, collectively was more than what the economy ended up needing? chair powell. so i think it’s too soon to write that history, really. but what i would say is this. the—if you remember what it felt like at the beginning of the pandemic, literally the global economy shutting down in large part, including our own economy, and people going to their homes for weeks on end in masks, and there are no vaccines, and it could be a really long  time to get them, you know. and then, you know, you have—economic activity drops by a shocking amount in one—so there was a real risk of lasting damage. and i think congress responded remarkably with the—with the cares act, incredibly timely and very powerful. people will—there’ll always be flaws in these things. but in real time, it was a remarkable achievement. and we responded. and what we were able to do was, you know, stave off a collapse of the financial system at the beginning and make time for what really needed to happen, which was the income replacement and then the recovery that congress enabled with the cares act. so now, that was a lot of—that was a lot. and what we did was a lot. and, you know, now—so, what we have now is, we have the strongest recovery of any, any country. and we have—we have a recovery that looks completely unlike other recoveries that we’ve had, because we’ve, we’ve put so much support behind the recovery. and we’re managing the, the relatively high-class problems that come with that, which are high inflation and a labor shortage. so—and these are serious problems, very serious problems that we, you know, we’re working as hard as we can on. was it too much? again, i’m going to leave that to the historians. and—but look, in 25 years, we’ll look back at this incident, which will be a, you know, 2-, 3-, 4-, 5-year period. and we’ll say, you know, we’ll have a—we’ll have a much better basis to make a judgment about the actions that people took. but it was all founded, though, in a—in a very strong reaction to a, you know, to a unique historical event. and i guess i’ll have to leave it at that. i look for—i hope i’ll be around to see how that looks in 25 years. michael derby. fair enough. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to jean yung.  jean yung. thanks, michelle. chair powell, some investors are expecting the yield curve could flatten, or even invert, after rate hikes begin. would that worry you, and how important is that risk in the fed’s consideration for adjusting policy? chair powell. so we, we do monitor the slope of the yield curve, but we don’t control the slope of the yield curve. many flat—many factors influence longer-term interest rates. but it is something that we watch, and, and you will know that from when we had this issue a few years ago. and we take it into account, along with many other financial conditions, as we try to assess the implications of all those conditions for the economic outlook. so that’s, that’s one thing i would say. another is, currently, you’ve got a slope. if you think about 2s to 10s, 2-year treasury to 10-year treasury, i think that’s around 75 basis points. that’s well within the range of a normal—of a normal yield-curve slope. so it’s something we’re monitoring. we don’t think of it as—i don’t think of it as some kind of an iron law. but we do look at it and try to understand the implications and what it’s telling us. and it’s—but it’s one of many things that we monitor. jean yung. can i follow up real quick and ask, if it—if it did invert, would you tie it to u.s. fundamentals? or would it be driven by a much broader set of factors? chair powell. we’d—that’s, that’s a good question in, in real time. obviously, u.s. long-term sovereign debt is an—is an important global asset. and it—and the fact that our rates are so much higher than, than other risk-free sovereign rates around the world may put something of a ceiling on our—on our rates. i don’t know. but it would really depend on the— on the facts and circumstances at that time. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to brian cheung for the last question.  brian cheung. hi, chairman powell. brian cheung, yahoo finance. within the context of just the broad effort to normalize rates, would you describe what you want to do as a gradual hiking? and then, secondly, within the context of hiking cycles, it’s often the talking point for financial stability and wanting to make sure that asset bubbles don’t emerge. is that something that has also factored into the conversation as you start to think about hiking rates? thanks. chair powell. i would describe what we’re doing along these lines. this is going to be a year in which we move steadily away from the very highly accommodative monetary policy that we put in place to deal with the—with the economic effects of the pandemic. and that’s going to involve a number of things. it’s going to involve and does involve finishing asset purchases. it’s going to involve lifting off. and it’s going to involve additional rate increases as appropriate. and we, we have—we’re going to write down in march our next assessment of what that might be. it’s going to continue to evolve as the data evolve. we need to be quite adaptable, i think, in our understanding of this. the last thing we’re going to do is, we’re going to have a couple more meetings, i think, to talk about allowing the balance sheet to begin to run off and [to] do so in a predictable manner. and that’s, that’s something that we will also be doing as appropriate. and i wouldn’t—i don’t think it’s possible to say exactly how this is going to go. and we’re, we’re going to need to be, as i’ve mentioned, nimble about this. and the economy is quite different this time. i’ve said this several times now. the economy is quite different. it’s stronger. inflation is higher. the labor market is much, much stronger than it was. and growth is above trend, even this year, let alone last year. so all of those things are going to go into our thinking as we make—as we make monetary policy. and  you asked about financial stability concerns. in connection with our policy–was that your question? brian cheung. yes. within the context of other hiking cycles, it seems like [a set of] worries about asset bubbles emerging as a result of easy rates has been part of that . i didn’t know if that was part of the discussion today. chair powell. i would just say this. we, we, of course, have a financial stability framework. and what it shows is a number of, of positive aspects of financial stability. but you mentioned, really, [the behavior of] asset prices is one of the four. so asset prices are somewhat elevated, and they reflect a high risk appetite and that sort of thing. i don’t really think asset prices themselves represent a significant threat to financial stability, and that’s because households are in good shape financially than they have been. businesses are in good shape financially. defaults on business loans are low and that kind of thing. the banks are highly capitalized with high liquidity and quite resilient and strong. there are some concerns in the—in the nonbank financial sector around—still around money market funds, although the sec is making—has made some very positive proposals there. and we also saw some things in the treasury market during the acute phase of the crisis, which, which we’re looking at ways to address. but, overall, the financial stability vulnerabilities are manageable—are manageable, i would say. michelle smith. thank you very much.   NA
NA annual organizational matters 4 the agenda for this meeting reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate members of the federal open market committee for a term beginning january 25, 2022, were received and that these individuals executed their oaths of office. the elected members and alternate members were as follows: john c. williams, president of the federal reserve bank of new york, with naureen hassan, first vice president of the federal reserve bank of new york, as alternate patrick harker, president of the federal reserve bank of philadelphia, as alternate david b. cashin, principal economist, division of research and statistics, board; erin e. ferris, kyungmin kim, and bernd schlusche,2 principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board; colin j. hottman, principal economist, division of international finance, board loretta j. mester, president of the federal reserve bank of cleveland, with charles l. evans, president of the federal reserve bank of chicago, as alternate david na,2 senior financial institution and policy analyst, division of monetary affairs, board esther l. george, president of the federal reserve bank of kansas city, with neel kashkari, president of the federal reserve bank of minneapolis, as alternate. isaiah c. ahn, information management analyst, division of monetary affairs, board david altig, kartik b. athreya, and sylvain leduc, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of atlanta, richmond, and san francisco, respectively anne baum, john clark,2 spencer krane, paolo a. pesenti, julie ann remache,2 keith sill, and mark l.j. wright, senior vice presidents, federal reserve banks of new york, new york, chicago, new york, new york, philadelphia, and minneapolis, respectively 3 attended tuesday’s session only. james bullard, president of the federal reserve bank of st. louis, with meredith black, interim president of the federal reserve bank of dallas, as alternate by unanimous vote, the following officers of the committee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the committee in 2023: jerome h. powell john c. williams james a. clouse matthew m. luecke brian j. bonis michelle a. smith mark e. van der weide michael held richard m. ashton chair vice chair secretary deputy secretary assistant secretary assistant secretary general counsel deputy general counsel assistant general counsel committee organizational documents are available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rulesauthorizations.htm. 4  minutes of the meeting of january 25–26, 2022 page 3 trevor reeve stacey tevlin beth anne wilson economist economist economist shaghil ahmed brian m. doyle carlos garriga joseph w. gruber beverly hirtle david e. lebow ellis w. tallman geoffrey tootell william wascher associate economists by unanimous vote, the committee selected the federal reserve bank of new york to execute transactions for the system open market account (soma). by unanimous vote, the committee selected lorie k. logan and patricia zobel to serve at the pleasure of the committee as manager and deputy manager of the soma, respectively, on the understanding that these selections were subject to being satisfactory to the federal reserve bank of new york. secretary’s note: the federal reserve bank of new york subsequently sent advice that the manager and deputy manager selections indicated previously were satisfactory. by unanimous vote, the committee voted to reaffirm without revision the authorization for domestic open market operations, as shown below. by unanimous vote, the committee voted to reaffirm without revision the authorization for foreign currency operations and to amend the foreign currency directive to remove references to the temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks, as shown below. the guidelines for the conduct of system open market operations in federal-agency issues remained suspended. authorization for domestic open market operations (as reaffirmed effective january 25, 2022) open market transactions 1. the federal open market committee (the “committee”) authorizes and directs the federal reserve bank selected by the committee to execute open market transactions (the “selected bank”), to the extent necessary to carry out the most recent domestic policy directive adopted by the committee: a. to buy or sell in the open market securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, the united states, and securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the united states, that are eligible for purchase or sale under section 14(b) of the federal reserve act (“eligible securities”) for the system open market account (“soma”): i. as an outright operation with securities dealers and foreign and international accounts maintained at the selected bank: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis (including such transactions as are commonly referred to as dollar rolls and coupon swaps) at market prices; or ii. as a temporary operation: on a same-day or deferred delivery basis, to purchase such eligible securities subject to an agreement to resell (“repo transactions”) or to sell such eligible securities subject to an agreement to repurchase (“reverse repo transactions”) for a term of 65 business days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise authorized by the committee, are determined by competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limitations on the volume of agreements with individual counterparties; b. to allow eligible securities in the soma to mature without replacement; c. to exchange, at market prices, in connection with a treasury auction, maturing eligible securities in the soma with the treasury, in the case of eligible securities that are direct obligations of the united states or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by the united states; and d. to exchange, at market prices, maturing eligible securities in the soma with an agency of the united states, in the case of eligible securities that are direct obligations of that agency or that are fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by that agency. securities lending 2. in order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, the committee authorizes the selected bank to operate a program to lend eligible securities held in the soma to dealers on an overnight basis (except that the selected bank may lend eligible securities for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions). a. such securities lending must be: i. at rates determined by competitive bidding; ii. at a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives of the program;  page 4 federal open market committee iii. subject to reasonable limitations on the total amount of a specific issue of eligible securities that may be auctioned; and iv. subject to reasonable limitations on the amount of eligible securities that each borrower may borrow. b. the selected bank may: i. reject bids that, as determined in its sole discretion, could facilitate a bidder’s ability to control a single issue; ii. accept treasury securities or cash as collateral for any loan of securities authorized in this paragraph 2; and iii. accept agency securities as collateral only for a loan of agency securities authorized in this paragraph 2. operational readiness testing 3. the committee authorizes the selected bank to undertake transactions of the type described in paragraphs 1 and 2 from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness, subject to the following limitations: a. all transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 shall be conducted with prior notice to the committee; b. the aggregate par value of the transactions authorized in this paragraph 3 that are of the type described in paragraph 1.a.i, 1.b, 1.c and 1.d shall not exceed $5 billion per calendar year; and c. the outstanding amount of the transactions described in paragraphs 1.a.ii and 2 shall not exceed $5 billion at any given time. transactions with customer accounts 4. in order to ensure the effective conduct of open market operations, while assisting in the provision of short-term investments or other authorized services for foreign central bank and international accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank (the “foreign accounts”) and accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank as fiscal agent of the united states pursuant to section 15 of the federal reserve act (together with the foreign accounts, the “customer accounts”), the committee authorizes the following when undertaken on terms comparable to those available in the open market: a. the selected bank, for the soma, to: i. undertake reverse repo transactions in eligible securities held in the soma with the customer accounts for a term of 65 business days or less; and ii. undertake repo transactions in eligible securities with foreign accounts; and b. any federal reserve bank that maintains customer accounts, for any such customer account, when appropriate and subject to all other necessary authorization and approvals, to: i. undertake repo transactions in eligible securities with dealers with a corresponding reverse repo transaction in such eligible securities with the customer accounts; and ii. undertake intra-day repo transactions in eligible securities with foreign accounts. transactions undertaken with customer accounts under the provisions of this paragraph 4 may provide for a service fee when appropriate. transactions undertaken with customer accounts are also subject to the authorization or approval of other entities, including the board of governors of the federal reserve system and, when involving accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank as fiscal agent of the united states, the united states department of the treasury. additional matters 5. the committee authorizes the chair of the committee, in fostering the committee’s objectives during any period between meetings of the committee, to instruct the selected bank to act on behalf of the committee to: a. adjust somewhat in exceptional circumstances the stance of monetary policy and to take actions that may result in material changes in the composition and size of the assets in the soma; or b. undertake transactions with respect to eligible securities in order to appropriately address temporary disruptions of an operational or highly unusual nature in u.s. dollar funding markets. any such adjustment described in subparagraph a of this paragraph 5 shall be made in the context of the committee’s discussion and decision about the stance of policy at its most recent meeting and the committee’s long-run objectives to foster maximum employment and price stability, and shall be based on economic, financial, and monetary developments since the most recent meeting of the committee. the chair, whenever feasible, will consult with the committee before making any instruction under this paragraph 5.  minutes of the meeting of january 25–26, 2022 page 5 authorization for foreign currency operations (as reaffirmed effective january 25, 2022) in general 1. the federal open market committee (the “committee”) authorizes the federal reserve bank selected by the committee (the “selected bank”) to execute open market transactions for the system open market account as provided in this authorization, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the committee: a. to purchase and sell foreign currencies (also known as cable transfers) at home and abroad in the open market, including with the united states treasury, with foreign monetary authorities, with the bank for international settlements, and with other entities in the open market. this authorization to purchase and sell foreign currencies encompasses purchases and sales through standalone spot or forward transactions and through foreign exchange swap transactions. for purposes of this authorization, foreign exchange swap transactions are: swap transactions with the united states treasury (also known as warehousing transactions), swap transactions with other central banks under reciprocal currency arrangements, swap transactions with other central banks understanding dollar liquidity and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements, and swap transactions with other entities in the open market. b. to hold balances of, and to have outstanding forward contracts to receive or to deliver, foreign currencies. 2. all transactions in foreign currencies undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 above shall, unless otherwise authorized by the committee, be conducted: a. in a manner consistent with the obligations regarding exchange arrangements under article iv of the articles of agreement of the international monetary fund (imf).1 b. in close and continuous cooperation and consultation, as appropriate, with the united states treasury. c. in consultation, as appropriate, with foreign monetary authorities, foreign central banks, and international monetary institutions. d. at prevailing market rates. standalone spot and forward transactions 3. for any operation that involves standalone spot or forward transactions in foreign currencies: a. approval of such operation is required as follows: i. the committee must direct the selected bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.c of this authorization, exceeding $5 billion since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the committee. the foreign currency subcommittee (the “subcommittee”) must direct the selected bank in advance to execute the operation if the subcommittee believes that consultation with the committee is not feasible in the time available. ii. the committee authorizes the subcommittee to direct the selected bank in advance to execute the operation if it would result in the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies, as defined in paragraph 3.c of this authorization, totaling $5 billion or less since the close of the most recent regular meeting of the committee. b. such an operation also shall be: i. generally directed at countering disorderly market conditions; or ii. undertaken to adjust system balances in light of probable future needs for currencies; or iii. conducted for such other purposes as may be determined by the committee. c. for purposes of this authorization, the overall volume of standalone spot and forward transactions in foreign currencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of the dollar values of individual foreign currencies purchased and sold, valued at the time of the transaction. warehousing 4. the committee authorizes the selected bank, with the prior approval of the subcommittee and at the request of the united states treasury, to conduct swap transactions with the united states exchange stabilization fund established by section 10 of the gold reserve act of 1934 under agreements in which the selected bank purchases foreign currencies from the exchange stabilization fund and the exchange stabilization fund repurchases the foreign currencies from the selected  page 6 federal open market committee bank at a later date (such purchases and sales also known as warehousing). reciprocal currency arrangements, and standing dollar and foreign currency liquidity swaps 5. the committee authorizes the selected bank to maintain reciprocal currency arrangements established under the north american framework agreement, standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements, temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements as provided in this authorization and to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the committee. a. for reciprocal currency arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the committee (or by the subcommittee, if the subcommittee believes that consultation with the committee is not feasible in the time available). b. for standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the chair. the chair may approve a schedule of potential drawings, and may delegate to the manager, system open market account, the authority to approve individual drawings that occur according to the schedule approved by the chair. c. for standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements all drawings must be approved in advance by the committee (or by the subcommittee, if the subcommittee believes that consultation with the committee is not feasible in the time available). d. operations involving standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements shall generally be directed at countering strains in financial markets in the united states or abroad, or reducing the risk that they could emerge, so as to mitigate their effects on economic and financial conditions in the united states. e. for reciprocal currency arrangements, standing and temporary dollar liquidity swap arrangements, and standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements: i. all arrangements are subject to annual review and approval by the committee; ii. any new arrangements must be approved by the committee; and iii. any changes in the terms of existing arrangements must be approved in advance by the chair. the chair shall keep the committee informed of any changes in terms, and the terms shall be consistent with principles discussed with and guidance provided by the committee. other operations in foreign currencies 6. any other operations in foreign currencies for which governance is not otherwise specified in this authorization (such as foreign exchange swap transactions with private-sector counterparties) must be authorized and directed in advance by the committee. foreign currency holdings 7. the committee authorizes the selected bank to hold foreign currencies for the system open market account in accounts maintained at foreign central banks, the bank for international settlements, and such other foreign institutions as approved by the board of governors under section 214.5 of regulation n, to the extent necessary to carry out any foreign currency directive of the committee. a. the selected bank shall manage all holdings of foreign currencies for the system open market account: i. primarily, to ensure sufficient liquidity to enable the selected bank to conduct foreign currency operations as directed by the committee; ii. secondarily, to maintain a high degree of safety; iii. subject to paragraphs 7.a.i and 7.a.ii, to provide the highest rate of return possible in each currency; and iv. to achieve such other objectives as may be authorized by the committee. b. the selected bank may manage such foreign currency holdings by: i. purchasing and selling obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and interest by, a foreign government or agency thereof (“permitted foreign securities”) through outright purchases and sales; ii. purchasing permitted foreign securities under agreements for repurchase of such permitted foreign securities and selling such securities under agreements for the resale of such securities; and iii. managing balances in various time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions approved by the board of governors under regulation n. c. the subcommittee, in consultation with the committee, may provide additional instructions to the  minutes of the meeting of january 25–26, 2022 page 7 selected bank regarding holdings of foreign currencies. additional matters 8. the committee authorizes the chair: a. with the prior approval of the committee, to enter into any needed agreement or understanding with the secretary of the united states treasury about the division of responsibility for foreign currency operations between the system and the united states treasury; b. to advise the secretary of the united states treasury concerning system foreign currency operations, and to consult with the secretary on policy matters relating to foreign currency operations; c. to designate federal reserve system persons authorized to communicate with the united states treasury concerning system open market account foreign currency operations; and d. from time to time, to transmit appropriate reports and information to the national advisory council on international monetary and financial policies. 9. the committee authorizes the selected bank to undertake transactions of the type described in this authorization, and foreign exchange and investment transactions that it may be otherwise authorized to undertake, from time to time for the purpose of testing operational readiness. the aggregate amount of such transactions shall not exceed $2.5 billion per calendar year. these transactions shall be conducted with prior notice to the committee. 10. all federal reserve banks shall participate in the foreign currency operations for system open market account in accordance with paragraph 3g(1) of the board of governors’ statement of procedure with respect to foreign relationships of federal reserve banks dated january 1, 1944. 11. any authority of the subcommittee pursuant to this authorization may be exercised by the chair if the chair believes that consultation with the subcommittee is not feasible in the time available. the chair shall promptly report to the subcommittee any action approved by the chair pursuant to this paragraph. 12. the committee authorizes the chair, in exceptional circumstances where it would not be feasible to convene the committee, to foster the committee’s objectives by instructing the selected bank to engage in foreign currency operations not otherwise authorized pursuant to this authorization. any such action shall be made in the context of the committee’s discussion and decisions regarding foreign currency operations. the chair, whenever feasible, will consult with the committee before making any instruction under this paragraph.  in general, as specified in article iv, each member of the imf undertakes to collaborate with the imf and other members to assure orderly exchange arrangements and to promote a stable system of exchange rates. these obligations include seeking to direct the member’s economic and financial policies toward the objective of fostering orderly economic growth with reasonable price stability. these obligations also include avoiding manipulating exchange rates or the international monetary system in such a way that would impede effective balance of payments adjustment or to give an unfair competitive advantage over other members. 1 foreign currency directive (as amended effective january 25, 2022) 1. the committee directs the federal reserve bank selected by the committee (the “selected bank”) to execute open market transactions, for the system open market account, in accordance with the provisions of the authorization for foreign currency operations (the “authorization”) and subject to the limits in this directive. 2. the committee directs the selected bank to execute warehousing transactions, if so requested by the united states treasury and if approved by the foreign currency subcommittee (the “subcommittee”), subject to the limitation that the outstanding balance of united states dollars provided to the united states treasury as a result of these transactions not at any time exceed $5 billion. 3. the committee directs the selected bank to maintain, for the system open market account: a. reciprocal currency arrangements with the following foreign central banks: foreign central bank bank of canada bank of mexico maximum amount (millions of dollars or equivalent) 2,000 3,000 b. standing dollar liquidity swap arrangements with the following foreign central banks: bank of canada bank of england bank of japan european central bank swiss national bank  page 8 federal open market committee c. standing foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the following foreign central banks: bank of canada bank of england bank of japan european central bank swiss national bank 4. the committee directs the selected bank to hold and to invest foreign currencies in the portfolio in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 7 of the authorization. 5. the committee directs the selected bank to report to the committee, at each regular meeting of the committee, on transactions undertaken pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 6 of the authorization. the selected bank is also directed to provide quarterly reports to the committee regarding the management of the foreign currency holdings pursuant to paragraph 7 of the authorization. 6. the committee directs the selected bank to conduct testing of transactions for the purpose of operational readiness in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 9 of the authorization. the committee voted unanimously to approve with minor revisions the standing repurchase agreement facility resolution, as shown below. all but one member of the committee voted to approve with minor revisions the standing fima repurchase agreement resolution. governor bowman abstained from the vote on the standing fima repurchase agreement resolution. the resolutions were modified to remove references to a specific facility rate to allow for normal adjustment in the facility rates when the committee makes changes to the target range for the federal funds rate. standing repurchase agreement facility resolution (as amended effective january 25, 2022) the federal open market committee (the “committee”) authorizes and directs the open market desk at the federal reserve bank of new york (the “selected bank”), for the system open market account (“soma”), to conduct operations in which it offers to purchase securities, subject to an agreement to resell (“repurchase agreement transactions”). the repurchase agreement transactions hereby authorized and directed shall (i) include only u.s. treasury securities, agency debt securities, and agency mortgage-backed securities; (ii) be conducted as open market operations with primary dealers and depository institutions as participants; (iii) be conducted with a minimum bid rate set at a level directed by the committee; (iv) be offered on an overnight basis (except that the open market desk at the selected bank may extend the term for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions); and (v) be subject to an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. these operations shall be conducted by the open market desk at the selected bank until otherwise directed by the committee. standing fima repurchase agreement resolution (as amended effective january 25, 2022) the federal open market committee (the “committee”) authorizes and directs the open market desk at the federal reserve bank of new york (the “selected bank”), for the system open market account (“soma”), to offer to purchase u.s. treasury securities subject to an agreement to resell (“repurchase agreement transactions”) with foreign central bank and international accounts maintained at a federal reserve bank (the “foreign accounts”). the repurchase agreement transactions hereby authorized and directed shall (i) include only u.s. treasury securities; (ii) be conducted with foreign accounts approved in advance by the foreign currency subcommittee (the ”subcommittee”); (iii) be conducted at an offering rate equal to the minimum bid rate for the standing repurchase agreement facility unless the subcommittee establishes a different offering rate; (iv) be offered on an overnight basis (except that the open market desk at the selected bank may extend the term for longer than an overnight term to accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar trading conventions); and (v) be subject to a per-counterparty limit of $60 billion per day. the subcommittee may approve changes in the offering rate, the maturity of the transactions, eligible foreign accounts counterparties (either by approving or removing account access), and the counterparty limit; and the subcommittee shall keep the committee informed of any such changes. these transactions shall be undertaken by the open market desk at the selected bank until otherwise directed by the committee. the open market desk at the selected bank will also report at least annually to the committee on facility usage and the list of approved account holders. regarding the tough and comprehensive ethics rules for senior officials that were announced in october, the chair indicated that staff were working through comments received from policymakers and were aiming to  minutes of the meeting of january 25–26, 2022 page 9 circulate a new draft soon. noting the urgency in bringing the new policy to completion, the chair proposed that the committee vote on a final draft as soon in the intermeeting period as possible. in the committee’s annual reconsideration of the statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, all participants supported the statement as written, and the committee voted unanimously to reaffirm without revision. in discussing the statement, the chair noted that, consistent with previous communications, a formal framework review would commence in 2024 and conclude in 2025. that timing would allow perspectives on recent events to inform considerations of potential revisions to the framework. statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy (as reaffirmed effective january 25, 2022) the federal open market committee (fomc) is firmly committed to fulfilling its statutory mandate from the congress of promoting maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates. the committee seeks to explain its monetary policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible. such clarity facilitates well-informed decisionmaking by households and businesses, reduces economic and financial uncertainty, increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society. employment, inflation, and long-term interest rates fluctuate over time in response to economic and financial disturbances. monetary policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to these disturbances. the committee’s primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy is through changes in the target range for the federal funds rate. the committee judges that the level of the federal funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run has declined relative to its historical average. therefore, the federal funds rate is likely to be constrained by its effective lower bound more frequently than in the past. owing in part to the proximity of interest rates to the effective lower bound, the committee judges that downward risks to employment and inflation have increased. the committee is prepared to use its full range of tools to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. the maximum level of employment is a broad-based and inclusive goal that is not directly measurable and changes over time owing largely to nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. consequently, it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the committee’s policy decisions must be informed by assessments of the shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. the committee considers a wide range of indicators in making these assessments. the inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and hence the committee has the ability to specify a longer-run goal for inflation. the committee reaffirms its judgment that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the federal reserve’s statutory mandate. the committee judges that longer-term inflation expectations that are well anchored at 2 percent foster price stability and moderate long-term interest rates and enhance the committee’s ability to promote maximum employment in the face of significant economic disturbances. in order to anchor longer-term inflation expectations at this level, the committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time, and therefore judges that, following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. monetary policy actions tend to influence economic activity, employment, and prices with a lag. in setting monetary policy, the committee seeks over time to mitigate shortfalls of employment from the committee’s assessment of its maximum level and deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal. moreover, sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a stable financial system. therefore, the committee’s policy decisions reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s employment and inflation objectives are generally complementary. however, under circumstances in which the committee judges that the objectives are not complementary, it takes into account the employment shortfalls and inflation deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. the committee intends to review these principles and to make adjustments as appropriate at its annual organizational meeting each january, and to undertake roughly  page 10 federal open market committee every five years a thorough public review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. financial developments and open market operations the manager turned first to a review of domestic financial market developments over the intermeeting period. treasury yields rose across the curve, led by higher real yields. expectations for tighter monetary policy ahead, as well as an easing of covid-related concerns, were cited as contributing to the increase in yields. the s&p 500 index declined around 5 percent, with sharp moves toward the end of the period, reportedly prompted by concerns about the implications of a tighter path of monetary policy and rising geopolitical risks. regarding the monetary policy outlook, with data showing continuing tightening of labor market conditions and elevated inflationary pressures, policymaker communications were perceived as pointing to an earlier and faster removal of accommodation than market participants had previously expected. against this backdrop, respondents to the open market desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants almost uniformly projected that the federal reserve’s net asset purchases would end by mid-march. the median survey projection for the commencement of balance sheet runoff shifted into the third quarter of this year, roughly a year and a half sooner than in the december surveys. most survey respondents also expected the portfolio to decline at a significantly faster pace than they did in december. expectations for the path of the federal funds rate shifted toward earlier rate increases, and interest rate futures priced in an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate at the march fomc meeting. on average, respondents to the desk surveys assigned a roughly 70 percent probability to an increase in the target range in march. the expected path of the federal funds rate in the desk surveys and derived from interest rate futures also steepened over the period. the median survey projection for the most likely level of the target range at the end of 2024 was about 2 percent, similar to december. nonetheless, survey respondents attached significant probability to outcomes in which the target range moved up more than indicated by the projected modal path. changing views about the likely path of the federal reserve’s balance sheet following the release of the december fomc minutes seemed to affect longer-term yields. far forward real yields moved higher over the period, with much of the increase following the release of the minutes for the december fomc meeting. in addition, agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) spreads widened notably after having been stable at low levels for the past year, reportedly driven by expectations for an earlier and faster runoff of agency mbs than had been expected. the manager turned next to a discussion of international financial market developments. sovereign yields increased across advanced foreign economies (afes), reportedly driven by receding concerns about the omicron variant, elevated inflation readings, and, relatedly, expectations that central banks would remove policy accommodation sooner than had been expected. several central banks concluded their net asset purchases late last year, and more were expected to do so this year. on the outlook for policy rates, several central banks had either already increased their policy rates or were expected to do so later this year. the manager provided an update on issues related to monetary policy implementation. reductions in the pace of the committee’s net asset purchases had proceeded smoothly to date and functioning in treasury and agency mbs markets remained stable. regarding the potential for the committee to reduce system open market account (soma) holdings in the future, market participants generally anticipated that soma redemptions could proceed smoothly at a somewhat faster pace than during the previous period of balance sheet reduction from 2017 to 2019. however, some also noted that soma redemptions would require significant adjustments to private-sector balance sheets, as investors absorb the net increase in treasury and agency mbs issuance to the private sector and money markets transition to lower levels of liquidity, and that these adjustments could take some time. the manager discussed expectations for the evolution of the federal reserve’s administered rates in connection with a potential future change in the target range for the federal funds rate. the desk survey responses suggested expectations for administered rates to be raised by the same increment as the target range for the federal funds rate. the manager noted that the current setting of administered rates relative to the target range had been working well and anticipated that it could continue to support effective policy implementation following any increase in the target range in coming months, although adjustments could be warranted over time. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. no  minutes of the meeting of january 25–26, 2022 page 11 intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. principles for reducing the size of the balance sheet participants continued their discussion of topics associated with potential adjustments in the committee’s policy tools that may be appropriate to support the achievement of sustained strong labor market conditions and a return of inflation to levels consistent with the committee’s longer-run 2 percent objective under a wide range of circumstances. at this meeting, participants discussed high-level principles that could be released to the public to describe the committee’s approach for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. they agreed that the principles would address, at a high level, the sequence of adjustments in the interest rate and balance sheet tools to reduce policy accommodation, the committee’s approach to balance sheet runoff, and its intentions for the longer-run size and composition of the balance sheet. the participants’ discussion was preceded by a staff presentation that reviewed key considerations raised by participants at the december fomc meeting and examined how the proposed set of principles, which reflected those considerations, compared with the policy normalization principles and plans issued in 2014. in their discussion, participants reaffirmed that changes in the target range for the federal funds rate are the committee’s primary means for adjusting the stance of monetary policy, as noted in the committee’s statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. participants judged that the timing and pace of balance sheet reduction would be determined so as to promote the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals and that it would be appropriate to begin the process of reducing the size of the balance sheet after the process of increasing the target range for the federal funds rate has begun. while participants agreed that details on the timing and pace of balance sheet runoff would be determined at upcoming meetings, participants generally noted that current economic and financial conditions would likely warrant a faster pace of balance sheet runoff than during the period of balance sheet reduction from 2017 to 2019. participants observed that, in light of the current high level of the federal reserve’s securities holdings, a significant reduction in the size of the balance sheet would likely be appropriate. participants noted that the level of securities holdings consistent with implementing monetary policy efficiently and effectively in an ample reserves regime was uncer- tain and probably would remain so. consequently, market conditions would have to be monitored closely to determine the appropriate longer-run level of reserves and the size of the balance sheet. participants agreed that the committee should reduce the federal reserve’s securities holdings over time in a predictable manner primarily by adjusting the amounts reinvested of principal payments received from securities held in the soma. they also agreed that the soma should hold primarily treasury securities in the longer run. regarding these two principles, many participants commented that sales of agency mbs or reinvesting some portion of principal payments received from agency mbs into treasury securities may be appropriate at some point in the future to enable suitable progress toward a longer-run soma portfolio composition consisting primarily of treasury securities. participants agreed that it was appropriate at this time for the committee to publish its high-level principles for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. they also agreed that it was important for the committee to retain the flexibility to adjust any of the details of its approach in light of changing economic and financial conditions. participants noted that the principles would serve as an important guide in future deliberations on balance sheet reduction. while no decisions regarding specific details for reducing the size of the balance sheet were made at this meeting, participants agreed to continue their discussions at upcoming meetings. following the conclusion of the discussion, all participants supported the proposed principles for reducing the size of the balance sheet. the committee voted unanimously to adopt the principles for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, as shown below. principles for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet (as adopted effective january 25, 2022) the federal open market committee agreed that it is appropriate at this time to provide information regarding its planned approach for significantly reducing the size of the federal reserve's balance sheet. all participants agreed on the following elements: • the committee views changes in the target range for the federal funds rate as its primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy.  page 12 federal open market committee • the committee will determine the timing and pace of reducing the size of the federal reserve's balance sheet so as to promote its maximum employment and price stability goals. the committee expects that reducing the size of the federal reserve's balance sheet will commence after the process of increasing the target range for the federal funds rate has begun. • the committee intends to reduce the federal reserve's securities holdings over time in a predictable manner primarily by adjusting the amounts reinvested of principal payments received from securities held in the system open market account (soma). • over time, the committee intends to maintain securities holdings in amounts needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample reserves regime. • in the longer run, the committee intends to hold primarily treasury securities in the soma, thereby minimizing the effect of federal reserve holdings on the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy. • the committee is prepared to adjust any of the details of its approach to reducing the size of the balance sheet in light of economic and financial developments. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the january 25– 26 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) growth had picked up in the fourth quarter after slowing in the third quarter. labor market conditions improved further in december, and indicators of labor compensation continued to show robust increases. consumer price inflation through november—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—remained elevated. total nonfarm payroll employment posted a moderate gain in december. the unemployment rate declined from 4.2 percent in november to 3.9 percent in december. the unemployment rate for african americans moved higher, and the hispanic unemployment rate declined; both rates remained well above the national average. the labor force participation rate was unchanged in december, and the employment-to-population ratio moved up. the private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, moved down in november but remained well above pre-pandemic levels; the quits rate was also elevated. weekly estimates of private-sector payrolls, constructed by the board’s staff using data provided by the payroll processor adp that were available through the first half of january, pointed to a slower pace of private employment gains relative to december. average hourly earnings rose at an annual rate of 6.2 percent over the last three months of the year; although wage increases were widespread across industries, they were particularly notable in the leisure and hospitality sector as well as the transportation and warehousing sector. inflation readings remained high, and various indicators suggested that inflationary pressures had broadened over the second half of 2021. total pce price inflation was 5.7 percent over the 12 months ending in november, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.7 percent over the same period. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 2.8 percent in november, 1 percentage point higher than its year-earlier rate of increase. in december, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 7.0 percent, while core cpi inflation was 5.5 percent over the same period. the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, had largely leveled off over the fall and was close to its 2014 average. real pce was unchanged in november, and available indicators—including the components of the nominal retail sales data used to estimate pce—pointed to a decline in december, possibly reflecting the sharp rise in covid-19 cases in the second half of that month as well as some holiday sales having been pulled forward to earlier months. housing demand remained strong, and available indicators suggested that residential investment increased in the fourth quarter. however, shortages of construction materials, buildable lots, and other inputs continued to weigh on activity in this sector. business fixed investment appeared to post only a small gain in the fourth quarter, as investment in transportation equipment was held back by supply bottlenecks and limited supplies of construction materials restrained nonresidential structures investment. manufacturing output moved down in december after advancing strongly in october and november. motor  minutes of the meeting of january 25–26, 2022 page 13 vehicle assemblies reversed some of their november increase; in addition, manufacturing production outside of motor vehicles ticked lower. total real government purchases appeared to have fallen in the fourth quarter. although available data suggested that real federal purchases rose, indicators of real state and local government purchases pointed to a decline in the fourth quarter despite state and local governments’ extremely strong budget positions and the widespread return to in-person schooling last fall. the u.s. international trade deficit widened at the end of last year. imports of goods rose sharply in november and december, led by increases in consumer goods, while exports of goods were little changed over the two months, on net, after surging in october. shipping congestion and other bottlenecks continued to restrain the level of trade in goods. meanwhile, services exports jumped in november, reflecting a sizable increase in exports of travel services after the reopening of u.s. borders to vaccinated foreign travelers early in the month. even so, services trade was very low relative to pre-pandemic norms, largely because the level of international travel remained depressed. incoming data suggested that foreign economic growth picked up in the fourth quarter of 2021 as economies in emerging asia bounced back from lockdowns in the third quarter induced by the delta variant of the covid-19 virus. purchasing managers indexes (pmis) pointed to improved supplier delivery times, and foreign vehicle production rose notably, suggesting that supply bottlenecks continued to ease somewhat. however, the rapid spread of the omicron variant led to renewed public health restrictions in several countries, particularly in china, and appeared to be weighing on activity at the start of the year. inflation abroad continued to rise, mostly driven by further increases in retail energy prices, effects from supply bottlenecks, and, in some emerging market economies (emes), by rising food prices. that said, input and output price components of pmis provided some tentative signs that easing supply constraints have started to contribute to some letup in inflationary pressures in several foreign economies. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, easing concerns around the economic effects of the omicron variant and fomc communications that were viewed as less accommodative than expected contributed to increases in treasury yields. long-term sovereign yields in afes also rose notably. broad domestic equity indexes decreased markedly, and spreads of corporate bonds widened modestly. short-term funding markets were stable, while participation in the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility increased further. market-based financing conditions remained accommodative, and bank lending standards eased for most loan categories. the expected path for the federal funds rate over the next few years—implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes—rose notably since the december fomc meeting, apparently reflecting less-accommodative-than-expected fomc communications and an easing of concerns around the economic effects of the omicron variant. those factors also contributed to notable rises in 2-, 5-, and 10-year nominal treasury yields. inflation compensation implied by treasury inflationprotected securities rose slightly, on net. broad equity indexes decreased markedly, on net, particularly in the latter part of the intermeeting period, as shifts in expectations about the pace of monetary policy tightening, global inflationary pressures, and escalating tensions between russia and ukraine weighed on equity prices. the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—increased considerably, on net, to above the 90th percentile of its historical distribution. spreads of investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds widened modestly. spreads of municipal bonds were roughly unchanged. short-term funding markets were stable over the intermeeting period. the effective federal funds rate and the secured overnight financing rate generally held steady at 8 basis points and 5 basis points, respectively. participation in on rrp operations averaged $1.6 trillion, about $150 billion higher than during the previous intermeeting period, and reached an all-time high of $1.9 trillion at year-end. government money market funds continued to receive investment inflows and accounted for the majority of on rrp take-up. over the intermeeting period, movements in foreign asset prices responded to waning concerns about the omicron variant’s potential economic effects and firming views that monetary accommodation in several advanced economies will be removed at a faster pace than previously expected. some market participants also pointed to rising geopolitical tensions related to russia as contributing to the moves. on net, afe sovereign yields increased notably, most major foreign equity indexes declined moderately, and the broad dollar index decreased modestly. eme sovereign spreads widened, and capital flows into eme-dedicated bond funds remained slightly negative, while flows into eme equity funds turned positive.  page 14 federal open market committee in domestic credit markets, financing conditions for nonfinancial firms remained broadly accommodative. gross issuance of corporate bonds and leveraged loans remained solid but slowed somewhat in december, reflecting seasonal factors. equity funding raised through initial public offerings continued at a strong pace in november and december, while equity issuance through special purpose acquisition companies remained muted relative to earlier in 2021. commercial and industrial (c&i) loans expanded over the fourth quarter following more than a year of declines. in the january senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported easier standards and stronger demand for c&i loans over the fourth quarter. the credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations remained strong over the intermeeting period. the volumes of nonfinancial corporate bond and leveraged loan upgrades exceeded those of downgrades in november and december. trailing default rates on nonfinancial bonds edged down further to historical lows, while market indicators of future expected default rates remained benign and historically low. in the municipal bond market, financing conditions remained accommodative, as municipal bond yields stayed near historical lows. issuance of municipal debt was strong in november and december. the credit quality of municipal debt remained stable, and the volume of defaults stayed low. financing conditions for small businesses eased a bit over the intermeeting period. in the january sloos, small banks reported easing c&i loan standards to small firms over the fourth quarter. loan originations to small businesses rose in november to near pre-pandemic levels. banks in the january sloos reported stronger loan demand by small firms over the fourth quarter, though loan demand remained weak overall. commercial real estate (cre) loan balances on banks’ books expanded at a solid pace in the fourth quarter, and, in the january sloos, banks reported an easing of standards on such loans amid stronger demand for most cre loan categories. issuance of non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) surged in the fourth quarter, while issuance of agency cmbs slowed. delinquency rates on mortgages in cmbs pools continued to fall but remained elevated for hotel and retail mortgages. in the residential mortgage market, financing conditions remained accommodative, particularly for borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. in the january sloos, banks reported easing lending standards for most mortgage categories in the fourth quarter. mortgage rates increased over the intermeeting period in line with rates on agency mbs and 10-year treasury securities but remained low by historical standards. the fraction of mortgage borrowers missing payments continued to decline through november. financing conditions for consumer credit remained accommodative for most borrowers, especially those with higher credit scores. lending standards for nonprime consumers in the credit card market continued to ease from the tight levels seen earlier in the pandemic. banks reported in the january sloos that demand for credit card loans strengthened over the fourth quarter, while lending standards eased for auto loans amid a weakening in demand. with sales running low because of constrained supply, auto loan growth continued to slow in october and november from the more rapid pace recorded in the first half of the year. the staff provided an update on its assessments of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, characterized the financial vulnerabilities of the u.s. financial system as notable. the staff judged that asset valuation pressures remained elevated. in particular, the forward price-to-earnings ratio for the s&p 500 index stood at the upper end of its historical distribution; high-yield corporate bond spreads and the excess loan premium for leveraged loans remained at low levels; and house prices grew strongly, with price-to-rent ratios that were at elevated levels. the staff noted that the market capitalization of crypto-assets had grown significantly over the past decade and had experienced considerable volatility, including sizable declines since late last year. the staff changed its assessment of vulnerabilities associated with nonfinancial leverage from notable to moderate, noting that measures of business leverage had declined to prepandemic levels. household delinquency rates remained relatively low, while household borrowing rose but was concentrated among prime borrowers. vulnerabilities arising from financial leverage remained moderate. risk-based capital ratios for banks remained above their pre-pandemic levels even after the resumption of shareholder payouts. in contrast, some available measures of hedge fund leverage continued to increase, and important data gaps continued to limit a full assessment of vulnerabilities posed by many nonbank financial institutions. vulnerabilities associated with funding risks were characterized as moderate. prime and tax-exempt money funds continued to have structural vulnerabilities that may lead investors to withdraw funds quickly in a  minutes of the meeting of january 25–26, 2022 page 15 stress situation and were a potential source of spillovers to other short-term funding markets. in response, the securities and exchange commission proposed reforms in december 2021 to make these funds more resilient. another vulnerability in funding markets was the significant growth in stablecoin arrangements over the past few years, which may increase challenges related to run risk and pose additional risks from their potential role as a means of payment. staff economic outlook the near-term projection for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the january fomc meeting was weaker than in december, reflecting the sharp rise in covid-19 infections caused by the rapid spread of the omicron variant and an assessment that supply constraints would resolve more slowly than previously expected. although real gdp still appeared to have posted a sizable gain in the fourth quarter of 2021, output growth was expected to slow noticeably in the first quarter of 2022 before picking up again later in the year as covid-19 cases declined and supply issues continued to be resolved. with most of the boost to growth from the reopening of the economy and easing of supply constraints expected to occur in 2022, real gdp growth was projected to step down in 2023 and to be roughly in line with potential growth in 2023 and 2024. however, the level of real gdp was expected to remain well above potential throughout the projection period, and labor market conditions were expected to remain very tight. the staff’s near-term projection for pce price inflation was revised up relative to december in response to the anticipated slower resolution of supply issues. in particular, the staff continued to expect that monthly inflation rates would move lower as supply constraints eased, but the projected step-down was less pronounced than in the december forecast. even so, an improvement in supply conditions and a decline in consumer energy prices were expected to slow pce price inflation to 2.6 percent in 2022. with supply conditions expected to normalize further but with the labor market expected to remain very tight, pce price inflation was projected to decline to 2 percent in 2023 before edging up to 2.1 percent in 2024. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for economic activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks to the inflation projection were skewed to the upside. in particular, the possibility that the economic effects of the virus would turn out to be larger than assumed in the baseline projection was viewed as an important source of downside risk to activity, while the possibility of more severe and more persistent supply issues was viewed as an additional downside risk to activity and as an upside risk to inflation. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but continued to be affected by the recent sharp rise in covid-19 cases. job gains had been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy had continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. overall financial conditions had remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. participants judged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints were expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation. risks to the economic outlook remained, including from new variants of the virus. with regard to the economic outlook, participants agreed that the omicron wave of the pandemic would weigh on economic activity in the first quarter of 2022. indeed, sectors of the economy that are particularly sensitive to pandemic-related disruptions, including travel, leisure, and restaurants, were experiencing sharp reductions in activity as a result of the omicron wave. participants commented that, for many afflicted individuals and families, the virus continued to cause great hardship. participants concurred that if the omicron wave dissipated quickly, then economic activity would likely strengthen rapidly and economic growth for 2022 as a whole would be robust. participants cited strong household balance sheets, rising wages, and effective adaptation to the pandemic by the business sector as factors supporting the outlook for strong growth this year. however, a number of participants noted that there was a risk that additional variants could weigh on economic activity this year. participants noted that supply chain bottlenecks and labor shortages had continued to limit businesses’ ability to meet strong demand, with these challenges exacerbated by the emergence and spread of the omicron variant. in particular, the omicron wave had led to much  page 16 federal open market committee more widespread worker absences due to illness, virus exposure, or caregiving needs, which had curtailed activity in many sectors including airlines, trucking, and warehousing. some participants reported that their business contacts were hopeful that the effects of the omicron wave would be relatively short lived. nevertheless, several participants reported that their contacts expected the ongoing labor shortages and other supply constraints to persist well after the acute effects of the omicron wave had waned. participants’ contacts also reported continued widespread input cost pressures, which, amid generally robust demand, they reported having largely been able to pass on to their customers. a few participants commented that agricultural businesses were experiencing higher input costs, and those higher costs were putting strain on the finances of those firms even as they experienced generally strong demand for their products. in their discussion of the household sector, many participants noted that the onset of the omicron wave had damped consumer demand, particularly for services, with much of the recent weakness concentrated in highcontact sectors such as travel, dining, and leisure and hospitality. almost all of those participants anticipated that household demand would recover briskly if the omicron wave subsided quickly, with spending supported by strong household balance sheets that were bolstered by high rates of saving earlier in the pandemic and ongoing robust gains in labor income. participants noted that the labor market had made remarkable progress in recovering from the recession associated with the pandemic and, by most measures, was now very strong. increases in employment had been solid in recent months; the unemployment rate had declined sharply, reaching 3.9 percent in december; job openings and quits were near record high levels; and nominal wages were rising at the fastest pace in decades. several participants commented that the gains, on balance, over recent months had been broad based, with notable improvements for lower-wage workers as well as african americans and hispanics. against this backdrop of a generally strong and improving labor market, many participants observed that the effects of the omicron variant likely would only temporarily suppress the rate of labor market gains. the labor force participation rate had edged up further over the past few months, and some participants indicated that they expected it to continue to increase as the pandemic eased. a couple of participants noted that the participation rate remained lower than trend levels that account for changing demographics. participants noted that their district contacts were reporting that labor demand remained historically strong and that labor supply remained constrained, resulting in a broad shortage of workers across many parts of the economy. as a result, there was widespread evidence that the labor market was very tight, including near-record rates of quits and job vacancies as well as nominal wage growth that was the highest recorded in decades. several participants reported that district business contacts were either planning to implement or had implemented larger wage increases than those of recent years to retain current employees or attract new workers. a few participants also reported contacts having been forced to reduce operating hours or close businesses temporarily because of labor shortages. acknowledging that the maximum level of employment consistent with price stability evolves over time, participants expressed a range of views regarding their assessments of current labor market conditions relative to the committee’s goal of maximum employment. many participants commented that they viewed labor market conditions as already at or very close to those consistent with maximum employment, citing indications of strong labor markets including the low levels of unemployment rates, elevated wage pressures, near-record levels of job openings and quits, and a broad shortage of workers across many parts of the economy. a couple of participants commented that, in their view, the economy likely had not yet reached maximum employment, noting that, even for prime-age workers, labor force participation rates were still lower than those that prevailed before the pandemic or that a reallocation of labor across sectors could lead to higher levels of employment over time. participants remarked that recent inflation readings had continued to significantly exceed the committee’s longer-run goal and elevated inflation was persisting longer than they had anticipated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy. however, some participants commented that elevated inflation had broadened beyond sectors most directly affected by those factors, bolstered in part by strong consumer demand. in addition, various participants cited other developments that had the potential to place additional upward pressure on inflation, including real wage growth in excess of productivity growth and increases in prices for housing services. participants acknowledged that elevated inflation was a burden on u.s. households, particularly those who were least able to pay higher prices for essential goods and services. some participants reported that their business  minutes of the meeting of january 25–26, 2022 page 17 contacts remained concerned about persistently high inflation and that they were adjusting their business practices to cope with higher input costs—for instance, by raising output prices or utilizing contracts that were contingent on their costs. participants generally expected inflation to moderate over the course of the year as supply and demand imbalances ease and monetary policy accommodation is removed. some participants remarked that longer-term measures of inflation expectations appeared to remain well anchored, which would support a return of inflation over time to levels consistent with the committee’s goals. in their discussion of risks to the outlook, participants agreed that uncertainty regarding the path of inflation was elevated and that risks to inflation were weighted to the upside. participants cited several such risks, including the zero-tolerance covid-19 policy in china that had the potential to further disrupt supply chains, the possibility of geopolitical turmoil that could cause increases in global energy prices or exacerbate global supply shortages, a worsening of the pandemic, persistent real wage growth in excess of productivity growth that could trigger inflationary wage–price dynamics, or the possibility that longer-term inflation expectations could become unanchored. a few participants pointed to the possibility that structural factors that had contributed to low inflation in the previous decade, such as technological changes, demographics, and a low real interest rate environment, may reemerge when the effects of the pandemic abate. uncertainty about real activity was also seen as elevated. various participants noted downside risks to the outlook, including a possible worsening of the pandemic, the potential for escalating geopolitical tensions, or a substantial tightening in financial conditions. participants who commented on issues related to financial stability cited a number of factors that could represent potential vulnerabilities to the financial system. a few participants noted that asset valuations were elevated across a range of markets and raised the concern that a major realignment of asset prices could contribute to a future downturn. a couple of these participants judged that prolonged accommodative financial conditions could be contributing to financial imbalances. a couple of other participants cited reasons why elevated asset valuations might prove to be less of a threat to financial stability than in past reversals of asset prices. in particular, they noted the relatively healthy balance sheet positions of households and nonfinancial firms, the wellcapitalized and liquid banking sector, and the fact that the rise in housing prices was not being fueled by a large increase in mortgage debt as suggesting that the financial system might prove resilient to shocks. some participants saw emerging risks to financial stability associated with the rapid growth in crypto-assets and decentralized finance platforms. a few participants pointed to risks associated with highly leveraged, nonbank financial institutions or the potential vulnerability of prime money market funds to a sudden withdrawal of liquidity. in their consideration of the stance of monetary policy, participants agreed that it would be appropriate for the committee to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent in support of the committee’s objectives of maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. they also anticipated that it would soon be appropriate to raise the target range. in discussing why beginning to remove policy accommodation could soon be warranted, participants noted that inflation continued to run well above 2 percent and generally judged the risks to the outlook for inflation as tilted to the upside. participants also assessed that the labor market was strong, having made substantial, broad-based progress over the past year. in light of elevated inflation pressures and the strong labor market, participants continued to judge that the committee’s net asset purchases should be concluded soon. most participants preferred to continue to reduce the committee’s net asset purchases according to the schedule announced in december, bringing them to an end in early march. a couple of participants stated that they favored ending the committee’s net asset purchases sooner to send an even stronger signal that the committee was committed to bringing down inflation. participants discussed the implications of the economic outlook for the likely timing and pace for removing policy accommodation. compared with conditions in 2015 when the committee last began a process of removing monetary policy accommodation, participants viewed that there was a much stronger outlook for growth in economic activity, substantially higher inflation, and a notably tighter labor market. consequently, most participants suggested that a faster pace of increases in the target range for the federal funds rate than in the post2015 period would likely be warranted, should the economy evolve generally in line with the committee’s expectation. even so, participants emphasized that the appropriate path of policy would depend on economic and financial developments and their implications for the outlook and the risks around the outlook, and they will be updating their assessments of the appropriate setting for the policy stance at each meeting. participants noted  page 18 federal open market committee that the removal of policy accommodation in current circumstances depended on the timing and pace of both increases in the target range of the federal funds rate and the reduction in the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. in this context, a number of participants commented that conditions would likely warrant beginning to reduce the size of the balance sheet sometime later this year. in their discussion of the outlook for monetary policy, many participants noted the influence on financial conditions of the committee’s recent communications and viewed these communications as helpful in shifting private-sector expectations regarding the policy outlook into better alignment with the committee’s assessment of appropriate policy. participants continued to stress that maintaining flexibility to implement appropriate policy adjustments on the basis of risk-management considerations should be a guiding principle in conducting policy in the current highly uncertain environment. most participants noted that, if inflation does not move down as they expect, it would be appropriate for the committee to remove policy accommodation at a faster pace than they currently anticipate. some participants commented on the risk that financial conditions might tighten unduly in response to a rapid removal of policy accommodation. a few participants remarked that this risk could be mitigated through clear and effective communication of the committee’s assessments of the economic outlook, the risks around the outlook, and the appropriate path for monetary policy. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. they noted that the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic had improved in recent months but were being affected by the recent sharp rise in covid-19 cases. job gains had been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. members remarked that supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy had continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. overall financial conditions remained accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. members also acknowledged that the path of the economy continued to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints were expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation, but risks to the economic outlook remained, including from new variants of the virus. in order to support the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability objectives, members agreed to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. with inflation well above 2 percent and a strong labor market, members expected that it would soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. members agreed to continue to reduce the monthly pace of the committee’s net asset purchases, bringing them to an end in early march. specifically, beginning in february, the committee would increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $20 billion per month and of agency mbs by at least $10 billion per month. members noted that the federal reserve’s ongoing asset purchases and holdings of securities would continue to foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. they also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. members agreed to remove the opening sentence from previous postmeeting statements regarding using the federal reserve’s full range of tools to support the u.s. economy. this language was adopted during the height of the financial market turmoil in march 2020, when the committee began its asset purchase program, and members acknowledged that it was no longer warranted in light of the strong economy as well as the committee’s announcement that net asset purchases would end in early march. members agreed that the postmeeting statement should be updated to reflect the committee’s expectation that it would soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate in light of elevated inflation pressures and the strong labor market. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute  minutes of the meeting of january 25–26, 2022 page 19 transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective january 27, 2022, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to ¼ percent. • complete the increase in system open market account (soma) holdings of treasury securities by $40 billion and of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) by $20 billion, as indicated in the monthly purchase plans released in mid-january. • increase the soma holdings of treasury securities by $20 billion and of agency mbs by $10 billion, during the monthly purchase period beginning in mid-february. • increase holdings of treasury securities and agency mbs by additional amounts as needed to sustain smooth functioning of markets for these securities. • conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs in agency mbs. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. the sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months but are being affected by the recent sharp rise in covid-19 cases. job gains have been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined substantially. supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation. overall financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to support the economy and the flow of credit to u.s. households and businesses. the path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus. progress on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints are expected to support continued gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation. risks to the economic outlook remain, including from new variants of the virus. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. with inflation well above 2 percent and a strong labor market, the committee expects it will soon be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate. the committee decided to continue to reduce the monthly pace of its net asset purchases, bringing them to an end in early march. beginning in february, the committee will increase its holdings of treasury securities by at least $20 billion per month and of agency mortgage‑backed securities by at least $10 billion per month. the federal reserve’s ongoing purchases and holdings of securities will continue to foster smooth market functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary  page 20 federal open market committee policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, chair; john c. williams, vice chair; michelle w. bowman; lael brainard; james bullard; esther l. george; patrick harker; loretta j. mester; and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. patrick harker voted as an alternate member at this meeting. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective january 27, 2022. the board also voted unanimously to approve the establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 0.25 percent. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, march 15–16, 2022. the meeting adjourned at 10:10 a.m. on january 26, 2022. notation vote by notation vote completed on january 4, 2022, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on december 14–15, 2021.  james a. clouse secretary 
march 16, 2022 chair powell. good afternoon. i want to begin by acknowledging the tremendous hardship the ukrainian people are suffering as a result of russia’s invasion. the human toll is tragic. the financial and economic implications for the global economy and the u.s. economy are highly uncertain. at the federal reserve, we are strongly committed to achieving the monetary policy goals that congress has given us: maximum employment and price stability. today, in support of these goals, the fomc raised its policy interest rate by ¼ percentage point. the economy is very strong, and against the backdrop of an extremely tight labor market and high inflation, the committee anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate. in addition, we expect to begin reducing the size of our balance sheet at a coming meeting. economic activity expanded at a robust 5½ percent pace last year, reflecting progress on vaccinations and the reopening of the economy, fiscal and monetary policy support, and the healthy financial positions of households and businesses. the rapid spread of the omicron variant led to some slowing in economic activity early this year. but cases have declined sharply since mid-january, and the slowdown seems to have been mild and brief. although the invasion of ukraine and related events represent a downside risk to the outlook for economic activity, fomc participants continue to foresee solid growth. as shown in our summary of economic projections, the median projection for real gdp growth stands at 2.8 percent this year, 2.2 percent next year, and 2 percent in 2024. the labor market has continued to strengthen and is extremely tight. over the first two months of the year, employment rose by more than a million jobs. in february, the  unemployment rate hit a post-pandemic low of 3.8 percent, a bit below the median of committee participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal level. the improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for african americans and hispanics. labor demand is very strong, and while labor force participation has increased somewhat, labor supply remains subdued. as a result, employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at their fastest pace in many years. fomc participants expect the labor market to remain strong, with the median projection for the unemployment rate declining to 3.5 percent by the end of this year and remaining near that level thereafter. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. aggregate demand is strong, and bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond. these supply disruptions have been larger, and longer lasting, than anticipated, exacerbated by waves of the virus here and abroad, and price pressures have spread to a broader range of goods and services. additionally, higher energy prices are driving up overall inflation. the surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from russia’s invasion of ukraine will put additional upward pressure on near-term inflation here at home. we understand that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we know that the best thing we can do to support a strong labor market is to promote a long expansion—and that is only possible in an environment of price stability. as we emphasize in our policy statement, with appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, we expect inflation to return to 2 percent while the labor market remains strong. that said, inflation is likely to take longer to return to our price-stability goal than previously expected. the median inflation  projection of fomc participants is 4.3 percent this year and falls to 2.7 percent next year and 2.3 percent in 2024; this trajectory is notably higher than projected in december, and participants continue to see risks as weighted to the upside. the fed’s monetary policy actions have been guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. our policy has been adapting to the evolving economic environment, and it will continue to do so. as i noted, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 1.9 percent at the end of this year—a full percentage point higher than projected in december. over the following two years, the median projection is 2.8 percent—somewhat higher than the median estimate of its longer-run value. of course, these projections do not represent a committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. reducing the size of our balance sheet will also play an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. at our meeting that wrapped up today, the committee made good progress on a plan for reducing our securities holdings, and we expect to announce the beginning of balance sheet reduction at a coming meeting. in making decisions about interest rates and the balance sheet, we will be mindful of the broader context in markets and in the economy, and we will use our tools to support financial and macroeconomic stability. as we noted in our policy statement, the implications of russia’s invasion of ukraine for the u.s. economy are highly uncertain. in addition to the direct effects from higher global oil and commodity prices, the invasion and related events may restrain economic activity abroad and further disrupt supply chains—which would create spillovers to the u.s. economy through trade  and other channels. the volatility in financial markets, particularly if sustained, could also act to tighten credit conditions and affect the real economy. making appropriate monetary policy in this environment requires a recognition that the economy often evolves in unexpected ways. we will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. and we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty to what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain moment. we are attentive to the risks of potential further upward pressure on inflation and inflation expectations. the committee is determined to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. the american economy is very strong and well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to jeanna at the new york times. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thank you so much for taking our questions. i wonder if you could detail your thinking a little bit about how you’re considering the, you know, the risks of going too fast and potentially tipping the economy into recession and how you’re weighing those risks against the possibility of going too slowly, allowing inflation to become embedded, and kind of getting “behind the curve.” chair powell. so i guess i would start by saying that, in my view, the probability of a recession within the next year is not particularly elevated. and why do i say that? aggregate demand is currently strong, and most forecasters expect it to remain so. if you look at the labor market, [you find that it is] also very strong. conditions are tight, and payroll job growth is  continuing at very high levels. household and business balance sheets are strong. and so all signs are that this is a strong economy and, indeed, one that will be able to flourish—not to say withstand, but certainly flourish—as well in the face of less accommodative monetary policy. so i guess that’s how i would say i’m looking at that. of course, the objective is to achieve price stability while also sustaining a strong labor market. and that is our overall objective. but we do feel the economy is very strong and well positioned to withstand tighter monetary policy. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to howard at reuters. howard schneider. hi, chair powell. i was wondering, in the seps, you have quite a markdown to gdp from 4 to 2.8 percent. i’m wondering, how much of that do you feel is the result of the fed’s stiffer-than-expected action here? you talk about monetary policy operating with a lag, but is this going to bite quicker than expected? chair powell. i don’t think that’s a big piece of it, actually. i think some of that is just an early assessment of the effects of spillovers from the war in eastern europe, which will hit our economy through a number of channels. highly uncertain, but, you know, you’re looking at higher oil prices, higher commodity prices. it’ll be—we think that will weigh on gdp to some extent. so that’s part of what moved those assessments down. i don’t think—i mean, i think, generally, monetary policy works with a lag, so some of that would also be in there. but remember, as well, that 2.8 percent is still very strong growth. if we think that the potential growth rate of the economy is somewhere between, somewhere around 1.75 percent, 2.8 percent is strong economic growth. it would have been one of the strongest years, in fact, of the last expansion. so, while it’s lower than last year’s 5.8 percent, it’s still quite strong growth. so i would say it’s quite a strong forecast.  howard schneider. so, in that context, what would trigger you to go faster or slower on the rate hikes? “ongoing increases” doesn’t really tell us whether this is going to come in bigger chunks or evenly paced through the year. chair powell. so, you know, the way we’re thinking about this is that every meeting is a live meeting. and we’re going to be looking at evolving conditions. and if we do conclude that it would be appropriate to move more quickly to remove accommodation, then we’ll do so. i can’t be perfectly specific about it, but that’s certainly a possibility as we go through the year. howard schneider. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to rachel at the washington post. rachel siegel. thank you, michelle. and thank you, chair powell, for taking our questions. i’m curious if you can be specific on when you expect to see inflation will start to come down, especially with the combination of rates going up, fiscal aid dissipating from the economy, and supply chains getting better? and if you don’t start to see that, how will you signal it? what will you be looking for? and what will you be looking for over the course of the year? thank you. chair powell. so i guess i would say that at the—before the invasion of ukraine by russia—so let’s go back to that. i would have said that the expectation was that inflation would peak sometime in the first quarter, maybe the end of the first quarter of this year, and then maybe stay at that level or a little bit lower and then start to come down in the back half of the year. so now we’re, you know, we’re getting—we’re going—we’re already seeing a little bit of short- term upward pressure in inflation due to higher oil prices, natural gas [prices] a little bit but not so much for us since we have our own natural gas supply, other commodities prices.  the other thing is that you’re seeing supply chain issues around shipping and around, you know, lots of countries and companies and people not wanting to touch russian goods. so that’s going to mean more tangled supply chains. so that could actually push out [in time] the relief we were expecting on supply chains generally. so i guess i would say that the expectation is still that inflation will begin to come down in the second half of the year. but if you look at where i read the sep headline median, we still expect inflation to be high this year, lower than last year, and then we expect—though, particularly with the effects of the war, but also the data we’ve seen so far this year—we expect inflation to remain high through the middle of the year, begin to come down, and then come down more sharply next year. michelle smith. let’s go to nick at the wall street journal. nick timiraos. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. chair powell, over the last six months, the fed has shifted its policy stance quite a bit. six months ago, you were still buying assets. most officials weren’t projecting any interest rate increases this year. and yet, despite the shift over the last six months, real rates are as negative today as they were then. so how concerned are you that further inflation surprises will offset the effects of recent policy firming by leading real rates to stay at levels that do not actually provide much restraint to the economy? thanks. chair powell. so that’s one of many ways of capturing the situation, which is that we—the committee really does understand that the time for rate increases and for shrinking the balance sheet has come. and i would just say, i would go back to “the economy is very strong,” as i mentioned. tremendous momentum in the labor market. we expect growth to continue. as i—it’s clearly time to raise interest rates and begin the balance sheet shrinkage.  and i just wanted to say that as i looked around the table at today’s meeting, i saw a committee that’s acutely aware of the need to return the economy to price stability and [is] determined to use our tools to do exactly that. you couched it in terms of real rates. i would say, if you look at the sep, you’ve got people getting close to or even above, in many cases, their estimate of the longer-run neutral rate. so i understand that doesn’t do it for real rates. but if you go out a year or two, many people are, in their forecasts, are having tight policy from a real interest rate standpoint. so that’s something that we’re focused on. of course, it’s a highly uncertain environment. and, you know, we don’t know what’s going to happen. but we do know that we’re going to deploy our tools to achieve our goals—and that includes the price-stability goal. michelle smith. let’s go to victoria at politico. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. so, looking at the summary of economic projections, you all have inflation coming down over the course of the year to 4.3 percent. and then you also have rates going up to what appears to still be below roughly what would be estimated to be the neutral rate, although i know that’s a little bit uncertain. so i was just wondering, how much of inflation coming down do you see as actually being as a result of the fed itself raising rates? and then also, if i could just ask, given that sarah bloom raskin withdrew her nomination, what do you expect to do with the regulatory portfolio? do you expect to assign a governor in charge of that? chair powell. okay, sorry. tell me again your first question. victoria guida. my first question is, how much do you expect inflation to come down as a direct result of the fed’s actions?  chair powell. okay. so part of inflation coming down at the very beginning is clearly to do with factors other than our policy, and those would include, potentially, the supply chain is getting a little bit better, certainly base effects. you’re lapping—as you know, when you look at a 12-month trailing window, you’re lapping very high inflation in march, april, may, june of last year. so there should be some effects from that in the 12-month picture. really what we’re looking for, though, is month-by-month inflation coming down. and so it’s really, it’s all the things we’ve been talking about, you know, that really haven’t helped much, including the shift away from goods and back to services, including supply chains getting better, including labor force participation—all those things that have been sticky and not happening. but a big part of it is, though, is the base effects i mentioned as well. you know, i think monetary policy starts to bite on inflation, and on growth, with a lag, of course. and so you would see that more in ’23 and ’24. but also, remember we started talking about rate increases last year. for some months now, financial conditions have already incorporated a significant number of rate increases. so it doesn’t start today. the effect, the moves are already priced into the market for a few months now. so the clock is running on that, and i think some of that will be seen in the second half of the year as well. so on the regulatory portfolio, i would just say this. you know, we have an obligation to carry out under the law in supervision and regulation, and we’re doing that. that’s what we’re doing. the committee is not active. so what’s happening is, things are coming to the full board, and we’re voting on them. we’re getting our business done. you know, we got the stress tests done. we’ve looked at, you know, a number of proposals for mergers and things like that. so we’re working ahead. of course, we don’t have a vice chair for supervision, as you mentioned.  but we’re making do with the situation we have. and a good number of things have come straight to the board for approval. michelle smith. let’s go to neil irwin at axios. [pause] let’s go to neil irwin. neil irwin. hi, chair powell. it’s neil irwin at axios. thanks for taking our questions. in the statement of economic projections, we see a forecast of median 1.9 percent fed funds rate at the end of the year, 2.8 end of next year. wondered whether that aligns with your own expectations, in particular on that point of overshooting the long-term neutral rate. and, also, if you can tell us anything about how that might be paced: front-loaded, back-loaded. how high is the bar for doing 50 at one meeting? chair powell. so i don’t—neil, i’ve never talked about my own sep projection. it’s in there, but i, you know, i think fed chairs have generally not done that, because we just haven’t done it. it’s because we’re, you know, we have to put together the consensus on the committee and present that consensus. so i wouldn’t talk about my individual one. and in terms of the pacing of it, i would just point out that that is—there’s seven remaining meetings this year. this isn’t something we discuss or debate or agree on. but there’s seven remaining meetings, and there’s seven rate hikes. i would add there’s also the shrinkage of the balance sheet, which, you people do the math different ways, but that might be the equivalent of another rate increase just from the runoff of the balance sheet. so i don’t—but i don’t know. we haven’t made any decisions on front-end loading or going steadily through the year. and, as i mentioned, you know, if you look at the sep, a good number of participants do see more than seven or eight increases this year. and i can’t give you, i’m not going to try to give you a really specific test for what it would take to do that. but i will say this, that we’ll be  looking at the data as they come in. we’ll be looking to see whether the data show expected improvement on inflation. we’ll be looking at the inflation outlook and making a judgement. and we’ll be going—each meeting is a live meeting. and if we conclude that it would be appropriate to raise interest rates more quickly, then we’ll do so. michelle smith. [long pause] one second. okay. we’re going to try one more time. colby smith at the ft. [long pause] okay. we’ll come back to colby. let’s go to edward lawrence. edward lawrence. yes. thank you, chair powell. thank you, michelle, for the question. i have a more basic question. the last time the cpi inflation—i know you look at pce, but cpi inflation—was as high as it is was july of 1981, when the effective federal funds rate was 19.2 percent. but given the current data, how far behind the curve of inflation do you believe the federal reserve is, in your mind? chair powell. so i just would say a couple things. we have the tools that we need, and we’re going to use them. and, as you can see, we have a plan over the course of this year to raise interest rates steadily and also to run off the balance sheet. we will take the necessary steps to ensure that high inflation does not become entrenched, while also supporting a strong labor market. and, as i mentioned, if we conclude that it would be appropriate to move more quickly, we’ll do so. i’ll leave it to others to make the judgment you asked for. edward lawrence. and then just as a follow on that, i wanted to get you on the record on this. what impact has there been on your job, given the fact that [indaudible]— chair powell. we lost you in the middle of the question. michelle smith. edward, can you repeat that question?  edward lawrence. —the impact that—given you’re not actually confirmed and governor brainard is not actually confirmed, has there been any impact on your job or the fed’s ability to handle inflation? chair powell. none whatsoever. michelle smith. okay, let’s go to colby smith at the ft. colby smith. thank you, michelle. chair powell, how concerned is the committee about the notable pickup in services inflation, which is perhaps less likely to self-correct? and to what extent does it alter both the committee’s confidence that long-term inflation expectations will not de-anchor in the coming months as well as the balance of risks that the fed may need to raise interest rates further above neutral than indicated in the dot plot? thank you. chair powell. thank you. so, of course, that’s something we’re watching report by report. and we’re certainly, we noticed it in the last meeting. and it’s part of the overall picture. we have expected services inflation to move back up to where it was, and that’s part of what’s happening is, in the case of some services, prices are still getting back up to where they were before the crisis. in other cases, it’s pretty clear that inflation has spread more broadly across services. and, yes, that is concerning. in the meanwhile, we see some progress on the good side. but, really, in this latest report, it was confined to vehicles, which is, admittedly, a large category. so, you know, as i mentioned, the committee acutely feels its obligation to move to make sure that we restore price stability and is determined to use its tools to do so. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to steve liesman at cnbc. steve liesman. thank you. mr. chairman, i wonder if you can help me understand the kind of logic, if there is one, in the sep here. as i look at the median forecast, for example, for unemployment, it runs for the three-year window below the long-run rate. i look at inflation  being above, over the three-year window, the long-run—or call it the neutral—rate, so the economy still runs hot. and that is all true in a regime when you run at least for two years the funds rate above the long-run rate. i guess my question is this: are you not create—giving a forecast here that essentially suggests you will be continuing to run further “behind the curve”—and never really get in front of inflation, because the economy will continue to run hot? and, kind of on a related issue: you said earlier [that] inflation will take longer to return to price stability than we had originally expected. isn’t that a choice you’re making? and, if so, why are you making that choice to let inflation run above price stability longer than you’d like? chair powell. right. so our, if you look, our—first of all, there is no—you’re looking at medians. but understand that there’s no, it’s not something we voted on. it’s not a plan. but if you look, people do have their in—by the end of this year, broadly, people are at or close to or, in some cases, above their estimates of longer-run neutral interest rate. okay. so that should stop pushing—that should, in other words, that should be a removal of accommodation for monetary policy, basically. at the same time, we will have done significant balance sheet runoff. and you can think of that as further. in the next year, and just looking at the median, you’re now above the, you know, above the, what people estimate to be the longer-run median. and also, in many people’s forecasts, that actually amounts to, you know, tight policy under, in real rates as well. so why does unemployment remain at 3.5 percent? you know, it—i mean, a couple points. one is the connection between—in the economy we had before the pandemic, the connection between inflation and the level of the unemployment rate was not very tight.  but this is—clearly, what this is is an expectation that, really it amounts to that, the idea that wage increases, which are now running above the level that would be consistent over the long run with 2 percent inflation, will move back down to levels which are still very attractive, full-economy kind of—full-employment kind of wages, but not to a point where they’re pushing up inflation anymore. and, as i mentioned, there are a lot of factors causing inflation to come down. and, you know, the reality is, there are many, many moving pieces, and we don’t know what will actually happen. but no matter what happens, this is a committee that is determined to use its tools to make sure that higher inflation does not become entrenched. and so we are determined on that front, and we’ll deal with what comes. this is a modal, or most likely, expectation. but we’ll deal with what comes, whether it’s better or worse. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to chris rugaber at the ap. christopher rugaber. hi. thank you. well, let me follow up a bit on that. i mean, there are a lot of economists skeptical that you can reduce inflation as much as you’ve penciled in without raising the unemployment rate. and i’m wondering, just what are the mechanisms you see in reducing demand? i mean, outside housing and autos, how do higher fed [funds] rates reduce consumer demand unless it’s through higher unemployment? thank you. chair powell. well, if you take a look at today’s labor market, what you have is 1.7-plus job openings for every unemployed person. so that’s a very, very tight labor market— tight to an unhealthy level, i would say. so, in principle, if you were—let’s say that our tools work about as you described, and the idea is, we’re trying to better align demand and supply, let’s just say in the labor market. so it would actually, if you were just moving down the number of job openings so that they were more like one to one, you would have less upward pressure on  wages. you would have a lot less of a labor shortage, which is going on pretty much across the economy. we’re hearing from companies that they can’t hire enough people. they’re having a hard time hiring. so that’s really the thinking there, is, you know, these are fairly well-understood channels, interest sensitive. and, basically, across the economy, we’d like to slow demand so that it’s better aligned with supply; give supply, at the same time, time to recover; and get into a better, you know, a better alignment of supply and demand. and that, over time, should bring inflation down. and i’ll say again, though, you know, we don’t have a perfect crystal ball about the future, and we’re prepared to use our tools as needed to restore price stability. you know, as i mentioned in my opening remarks, without price stability, there—you really can’t have a sustained period of maximum employment. it’s our—one of our most fundamental obligations is to maintain and restore, in this case, price stability. so we’re very committed to that. of course, the plan is to restore price stability while also sustaining a strong labor market. that is our intention, and we believe we can do that. but we have to restore price stability. michelle smith. okay. let’s go to scott horsley at npr. scott horsley. thanks. and i apologize if this covers some of the same ground you just talked about, mr. chair. i think i missed some of your answer there. but i have a follow-up question on the labor force. we have seen some gains in the prime-age workforce in the last few months. i wonder what you anticipate when it comes to some of the older workers as the health outlook has changed. are we going to see more recent retirees following tom brady back into the workforce? and what would that mean for wages and inflation?  chair powell. it’s hard to say. you know, what we saw in the last cycle was that, over the course of a long, steady expansion, labor force participation outperformed expectations. and that was just a, you know, it was a tight labor market, but it wasn’t—it was nowhere near as tight as this labor market. but it was a tight labor market, and so people stayed in the labor force longer. it wasn’t so much people coming back in the labor force after retirement. that’s not something that happens, in the aggregate, very much. but, so that’s what was happening. and, you know, more labor force participation is tremendously welcome. and, of course, our policy does not in any way preclude that. this is a situation where wages have moved up at the highest rate in a very long time. and people are able to quit their jobs and move to better-paying jobs in the same industry or different industries. so it’s a really attractive labor market for people. and once, you know, as we get past covid well and truly, it becomes an even more attractive one. so we hope that that will lead to more labor supply. that’s a good thing for the country. it’s a good thing for people. and it also will, we think, help relieve some of the wage pressures that do put inflation more at risk. that last part is, we’ll have to see whether, empirically, it winds up, works out that way. but, in principle, it ought to help with inflation as well. it’s not the only thing we’re looking for, though, from inflation. we’re looking for help from a number of different places and, most importantly, from our own policy. michelle smith. okay. let’s go to rich miller at bloomberg. rich miller. thank you, michelle. and thank you, chair powell. i’m sorry; i’m having some communication problems. so i missed some of the stuff you’ve said, and my apologies if this has been asked. since the fomc met last january, financial conditions have tightened markedly, equity prices down, treasury yield’s up, bond spread’s risen, yield curve has  flattened a lot, and even further just today, dollar’s up. is that welcome? and would you like to see more in order to achieve your goals? thank you. chair powell. so, as you know, policy works through financial conditions. that’s how it reaches the real economy—by just the mechanisms you mentioned. and remember that the financial conditions we had for the last couple of years were a function not only of very aggressive, and appropriately so, fiscal policy, but also highly accommodative monetary policy—the monetary policy settings that we put in place at the worst parts of the pandemic. so it is very appropriate to move away from those. and, yes, that will lead to some tightening in financial conditions in the form of higher interest rates and just the sorts of things—we’re not targeting any one or more of those things, but financial conditions generally should move to a more normal level so that—because we know the economy no longer needs, or wants, these very highly accommodative, this stance, which, you know, so it’s time to move to a more normal setting of financial conditions, and we do that by moving monetary policy itself to more normal levels. rich miller. when you say “move to a more normal setting” for financial conditions, that suggests to me that you want financial conditions to tighten further from where we are now. am i drawing the right inference from that? chair powell. well, yes. so i would say, we look at a broad range of financial conditions. and, of course, when we tighten monetary policy, we do expect that they will adjust in sync over time with monetary policy. it’s not any particular financial condition, but a broad range of financial conditions. they will reflect to some extent—they reflect any number of things. but, yes, we need our policy to transmit to the real economy. and it does so through financial conditions, which means that, as we tighten policy or remove accommodation so that  it’s at least less accommodative, that broader financial conditions will also be less accommodative. michelle smith. thank you. just a little housekeeping note: those of you in this call may be having some tech issues. if so, i understand the broadcast is coming through clearly on www.federalreserve.gov. you might go there for the audio. and now we’ll go to jean yung. jean yung. hi, chair powell. i wanted to ask about the balance sheet discussion you had at this meeting. can you give us any more details? did you discuss whether to cap runoffs or whether to increase those caps over what period, if there were any details? chair powell. yes. thank you for asking. so, at our meeting today and yesterday, we made excellent progress toward agreeing on the parameters of a plan to shrink the balance sheet. and i’d say we’re now in a position to finalize and implement that plan so that we’ll actually begin a runoff at a coming meeting. and that could come as soon as our next meeting in may. that’s not a decision that we’ve made. but i would say that that’s how well our discussions went in the last two days. so a couple things just to add. we’ll be mindful of the broader financial and economic context when we make the decision on timing, and we always want to use our tools to support macroeconomic and financial stability. we want to avoid adding uncertainty to what’s a highly uncertain situation already. so all of that will go into the thinking of the timing around this. in terms of the—i would say this. i don’t want to get too much into the details, because we’re literally just finalizing them. but the framework is going to look very familiar to people who are familiar with the last time we did this. but it’ll be faster than the last time. and, of course, it’s much sooner in a cycle than last time. but it will look familiar to you. and i would also say that there’ll be—i’m sure there’ll be a more detailed discussion of our—in the minutes  to our meeting that come out in three weeks, where i expect that it will lay out, you know, pretty much the parameters of what we’re looking at, which i think will look quite familiar. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to michael mckee at bloomberg tv. michael mckee. mr. chairman, since september of 2020, you’ve been operating on a monetary policy framework that let the economy run hot to bring unemployment down. that seems to be over. but i’m wondering how you would describe your reaction function now. what is it that the fed is trying to do other than bring inflation down? in other words, is it, we’re going to keep raising rates until it comes down to an acceptable level? chair powell. yes. so i want to clear one thing up again. and that is that nothing in our new framework or in the changes that we made has caused us to wait longer to raise interest rates. what we said in the framework changes was—and this was really a reflection of what had happened for the preceding couple of decades, actually. what we said was, if we see, you know, low unemployment, high employment, but we don’t see inflation, then we’re not going to raise rates ’til we actually see inflation. that’s what we said, and that was the sense of it. there was no sense in which, if we got a burst of really high inflation, we would wait to raise rates. that’s simply not in the framework. in fact, quite the contrary. the framework is all about anchoring inflation expectations at 2 percent. so i do hear this, you know, that the framework—really, we can’t blame the framework. it was a sudden, unexpected burst of inflation. and then it was the reaction to it, and it was what it was. but it was not in any way caused by or related to the framework. so, come to today. you know, i think our vision on this on the committee is very, very clear. what we see is a strong labor market. we see a labor market with a lot of momentum, great job creation. and we see the underlying economy’s strong. balance sheets are strong. yes, there are threats to growth  from, you know, from what’s going on in eastern europe. and, but, nonetheless, in the base case, there’s a pretty broad expectation of strong growth. but inflation is far above our target. and, you know, the help we’ve been expecting and other forecasters have been expecting from supply-side improvement, labor force participation, bottlenecks, all those things getting better—it hasn’t come. and so we’re looking now to using our tools to restore price stability, and we’re committed to doing that. and you see that, i think, in the summary of economic projections. and you see that in the decision we make, and you’ll continue to see it in the decisions we make, going forward. michael mckee. if i could follow up by asking—i guess what you’d call it is the “paul volcker” question: you don’t think unemployment is going to rise significantly, but, if it does, does that temper your desire to keep raising rates? chair powell. the goal, of course, is to restore price stability while also sustaining a strong labor market. we have a dual mandate, and they’re sort of equal. but, as i said earlier, you know, price stability is an essential goal. in fact, it’s a precondition, really, for achieving the kind of labor market that we want, which is a strong and sustained labor market. we saw the benefits of a long expansion, a sustained labor market. it pulled people back in, and there were really no imbalances in the economy that threatened the long expansion. it, just, the pandemic arrived; it was just a completely exogenous event. so that’s how we’re thinking about it. we, of course, want to achieve, you know, price stability with a strong labor market. but we do understand also that, really, you can’t have maximum employment for any sustained period without price stability. so we need to focus on price stability particularly, because the labor market is so strong and the economy is so strong. we feel like the economy can handle tighter monetary policy.  michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to brian cheung at yahoo. brian cheung. hi, chair powell. hopefully no tech issues here on this front. wanted to ask just kind of the broad question about how you are communicating what the fed’s doing here today to the average american who might not be reading the dot plots or understanding what the sep is. how is the 25 basis point hike today and then the signaling on future fed policy going to address the inflation that they’re feeling at the stores on a daily basis? chair powell. sure. so i guess i’d start by just assuring everyone that we’re fully committed to bringing inflation back down and also sustaining the economic expansion. we do understand that these higher prices, no matter what the source, have real effects on people’s well- being. and, really, high inflation takes a toll on everyone. but it’s really, especially, on people who use most of their income to buy essentials like food, housing, and transportation, where—i mean, we’ve all seen charts that show, if you’re a middle-income person, you’ve got room to absorb some inflation. if you’re at the lower end of the income spectrum, it’s very hard because you’re spending most of your money already on necessities, and the price is going up. but it’s punishing for everyone. so it has been a difficult time for the economy. but we do anticipate that inflation will move back down, as i mentioned earlier. it may take longer than we like, but i’m confident that we’ll use our tools to bring inflation down. you asked about rates. so the way that works, i would explain, is, as we raise interest rates, that should gradually slow down demand for the interest-sensitive parts of the economy. and so what we would see is demand slowing down, but just enough so that it’s better matched with supply. and that brings—that will bring inflation down over time. that’s our plan. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to jo ling kent at nbc news.  jo ling kent. hi, chair powell. thank you so much for taking my question during this today. my question is a follow-up to what brian just asked. what is your message to consumers out there who can no longer afford the basics due to this high inflation? chair powell. well, that is—yes, indeed. i mean, as i just said, you know, i think we do understand very much, and we very much take to heart, that it’s our obligation to restore price stability. and, you know, we’ve had price stability for a very long time and maybe come to take it for granted. but now we see the pain. i’m old enough to remember what very high inflation was like. and, you know, we’re strongly committed as a committee to not allowing this higher inflation to become entrenched and to use our tools to bring inflation back down to more normal levels, which—our target is 2 percent inflation. so we will do that. and i just would want people to understand that, and that’s—but the way we do that is by raising interest rates and by shrinking our balance sheet. and so financial conditions will become, at the margin, less supportive of various kinds of economic activity. that will slow the economy, while also allowing the labor market to remain very strong. and, you know, the good news is, the economy and the labor market are quite strong. and that means the economy, we think, can handle interest rate increases. jo ling kent. and as a quick follow-up to that, you know, obviously, the federal reserve walking this very complicated fine line, trying to avoid a recession. for the consumers out there who are worried about their jobs in a possible recession, what do you say to that? chair powell. well, i, you know, i say that our intention is to bring inflation back down to 2 percent, while still sustaining a strong labor market and that the economy is very strong. if you look at where forecasts are, people are forecasting growth that’s strong within the context of u.s. potential economic output. so—and we expect that to continue. and to the  extent the data come in different, then, of course, our policy will adapt. but we do believe that our policy is the appropriate one for this forecast, and we believe that we can bring down inflation. we believe that we can do so while sustaining a strong labor market. the labor market is—it’s not strong in the ordinary sense of the word. we have not seen a labor market where there are 1.7 job openings for every unemployed person or where there, if you add job openings to those who are employed, that’s actually substantially a larger number than the size of the workforce, than the number of people who actually count themselves as in the workforce. so this is a situation where demand is higher than supply. and when that happens, prices go up. and they—so we need to use our tools to move supply and demand back. and we don’t think we need to do this alone. there will be other factors helping that happen. but we certainly are prepared to use our tools—and we will. jo ling kent. thank you. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to simon at the economist. simon rabinovitch. hi. thank you, michelle. thank you, chair powell. sorry to take you away from inflation for one minute. may i ask about the sanctions on russia and, specifically, the freezing of the central bank assets? of course, that raises a similar risk for other sovereigns around the world and their biggest companies, potentially. any concerns about, in the long term, how this might affect the dollar’s status as the preeminent global reserve currency? and in the past couple of weeks, have you had to deliver any kinds of reassurance to other central bankers around the world? chair powell. well, so, of course, central bankers around the world are generally very in favor of these sanctions. but let me say this: sanctions are really the business of the elected government, and that’s true everywhere. so the administration and the treasury  department, in particular, and other agencies—they create these sanctions. we’re there to provide technical expertise, but they’re not, it’s not our decisions. and so i’m reluctant to comment on sanctions really much because, again, they’re not for us [to decide]. we have a very specific mandate. and these are really the province of elected governments, as i mentioned. so i’d have to leave it at that. sorry. michelle smith. thank you. let’s go to nancy marshall-genzer at marketplace. nancy marshall-genzer. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking the question. you’ve been talking a lot about rising wages, which, on the one hand, is a great thing, but are we possibly seeing the beginning of a wage–price spiral? chair powell. so the way i would say it is this: we, first of all, i would agree with the premise that wages moving up is a great thing. you know, that’s how the standard of living rises over time. and, generally, it’s driven over long periods by rising productivity. but what we have now, if you look at these, the wage increases that we have, we look at a—we’re blessed with a range of measures of wages that all measure different things. but right now, they’re all showing the same thing, which is that the increases—not the levels, but the increases—are running at levels that are well above what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation, our goal, over time. and that may be—we don’t know how persistent that phenomenon will be. it’s very hard to say. and that’s really, i think, the sense of your question about a wage–price spiral; is that something that’s going to start happening and become entrenched in the system? we don’t see that. you can see, for example, in some sectors that got very high wage increases early on, those wage increases looked like they may have slowed down to a normal level. but it comes back to, you know, what i’m saying here—which is, there’s a misalignment of demand and supply,  particularly in the labor market. and that is leading to wages moving up at ways that are not consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. and so we need to use our tools to, you know, guide inflation back down to 2 percent. and that would be in the context of an extraordinarily strong labor market. we think this labor market can handle, as i mentioned, tighter monetary policy. and the overall economy can as well. but, yes, wages are moving up faster than is consistent with 2 percent inflation, but it’s good to see that moving up. but it wouldn’t be sustainable over too long of a period to see them moving up that much higher. and that’s because of this misalignment between supply and demand. we expect to get more labor supply. we did last time. we got more than we expected during the last cycle. this time, we’ve gotten much less than expected. so it’s not easy to predict these things. but we do expect that we’ll get people coming back in the labor market, particularly as covid becomes less and less of a factor in many people’s lives, something we all wish. but, so that’s how we think about it. michelle smith. thank you. for the last question, we’ll go to don lee at the l.a. times. don lee. hi, chair powell. i think you said to the senate earlier this month that, in hindsight, the fed should have moved earlier. and it sounds like today that you don’t think that the fed is late. and, just wanted to get your clarification on that. and if it is, if you still think that the fed is “behind the curve,” how much “behind the curve” is it? chair powell. right. so we are not—we don’t have the luxury of 20/20 hindsight in actually implementing real-time decisions in the world. so, you know, so the question is—the right question is, did you make the right decisions based on what you knew at the time? but that’s not the question i was answering, which is knowing what you know now. so i think if we  knew now—of course, if we knew now that these supply blockages, really, and the inflation resulting from them in collision with, you know, very strong demand, if we knew that that was what was going to happen, then in hindsight, yes. it would have been appropriate to move earlier. obviously, it would be. but, again, we don’t have that luxury. and then, so, but that’s a separate question from your other question, which is “behind the curve.” and, you know, i don’t have the luxury of looking at it that way. you know, we are, we have our tools—powerful tools—and the committee is very focused on using them. we’re acutely aware of the need to restore price stability while keeping a strong labor market. and what i saw today was a committee that is strongly committed to achieving price stability, in particular, and prepared to use our tools to do that. we’re not going to let high inflation become entrenched. the costs of that would be too high. and we’re not going to wait so long that we have to do that. no one wants to have to really put restrictive monetary policy on, in order to get inflation back down. so, frankly, the need is one of getting back up, getting rates back up to more neutral levels as quickly as we practicably can and then moving beyond that, if that turns out to be appropriate. and, as you can see, it is appropriate in the sense that, [in] people’s [contributions to the] seps, they do write down levels of interest rates that are above their estimate of the longer-run neutral rate. and there’s also a range of estimates, too, as you will see if you look at the details of the sep. but thanks for your question. michelle smith. okay. thank you all. thanks, mr. chair. chair powell. thank you.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a review of global financial market developments. following the russian invasion of ukraine and the subsequent imposition of an array of sanctions, the ruble depreciated roughly 40 percent against the dollar. prices of dollar-denominated russian bonds plunged 80 to 90 percent, and local trading of russian equities was suspended after a precipitous decline in russian stock price indexes. global financial conditions tightened, reflecting declines in equity prices, increases in sovereign yields and credit spreads, and— for the united states—an appreciation of the dollar. prices of commodities that russia exports, particularly oil and natural gas, soared over the period. while oil prices partially retraced late in the period, options prices suggested considerable probability that oil prices could remain elevated or rise further in the months ahead. alongside the rise in commodities prices, measures of near-term inflation compensation increased sharply across advanced economies. in eastern european countries, currencies depreciated notably and equity prices declined, but most emerging market currencies outside of eastern europe depreciated only modestly or rose. sovereign spreads for emerging market economies (emes) widened, but the moves outside of eastern europe were relatively modest. the developments in ukraine sparked some liquidity strains across markets. overnight interest rates were steady throughout the period, but there were some signs of pressures in term funding markets. high levels of reserves in the banking system and the backstop facilities minutes of the meeting of march 15–16, 2022 page 3  in place—the new repurchase agreement facility for foreign and international monetary authorities (fima repo facility) and the standing repo facility (srf), as well as the standing central bank liquidity swap lines and the discount window—likely supported market confidence regarding the availability of liquidity and helped contain funding pressures. amid a rise in market volatility, trading liquidity declined across a number of sectors. in the treasury market, market depth fell and the price impact of trades increased modestly in some sectors. overall, however, volumes were typical, and markets continued to function in an orderly fashion. notwithstanding uncertainties associated with geopolitical developments, many central banks continued to signal intentions to move ahead with reducing policy accommodation to address elevated inflation. marketimplied policy rates one year forward rose notably across many advanced foreign economies (afes), extending increases seen over recent months. in the united states, incoming economic data and federal reserve communications led investors to expect a more rapid removal of policy accommodation than they had previously expected. market participants almost universally expected a 25 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate at the current meeting. moreover, futures prices implied that the federal funds rate would increase around 170 basis points through year-end, about 70 basis points more than had been priced in at the time of the january meeting. similarly, the median projection of the target range for the federal funds rate in the open market desk’s most recent surveys of primary dealers and market participants showed an increase of 150 basis points this year. the median projected path for the target range beyond 2022 rose another 100 basis points by the first half of 2024 to a level modestly above the median projected longer-run level before returning closer to the longer-run level in 2025. consistent with shifting expectations for the path of policy, shorter-dated treasury yields rose notably over the intermeeting period and the spread between the 10-year treasury yield and 2-year treasury yield narrowed. market participants expected an earlier and somewhat faster reduction in system open market account (soma) holdings of securities than they did in january. in the desk surveys, almost 90 percent of respondents projected balance sheet runoff to begin by july. overall, survey respondents expected a significant reduction in the balance sheet over coming years, although there was a high degree of uncertainty around the magnitude of the total decline. the manager turned next to a discussion of money markets and policy implementation. market participants expected the interest on reserve balances rate and overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) offering rate to be increased by 25 basis points at the current meeting, in line with their expected increase in the target range, and anticipated that the changes would fully pass through to market overnight interest rates. there was uncertainty around how on rrp usage might evolve in the near term as money market rates increased. if banks lifted their deposit rates by less than the increase in returns available on alternative investments, depositors could shift funds into these alternatives, leading to downward pressure on rates and increased on rrp take-up. if instead deposit rates moved up in line with net yields on alternative investments, on rrp takeup could remain relatively steady. over the longer term, however, on rrp balances were expected to decline as the federal reserve’s balance sheet runoff proceeded and gradually lifted money market rates relative to the on rrp rate. turning to desk operations, the manager noted that the desk would be maintaining the size of the soma portfolio through reinvestments until the committee directed otherwise. for treasury securities, the desk would follow the usual practice of rolling over all principal payments at auctions. in the absence of regular secondary-market purchases of treasury securities, the desk planned to maintain operational readiness by conducting small-value purchases and sales of treasury securities. for agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs), the desk planned to continue to reinvest principal payments on a monthly basis through secondary-market purchases. the manager discussed a plan to simplify administrative aspects of the soma holdings of agency mbs in coming months through a process of cusip (committee on uniform securities identification procedures) aggregation. the desk undertook similar programs of cusip aggregation following the conclusion of previous large-scale asset purchase programs; these past cusip aggregation programs were successful at reducing the cost and complexity of maintaining agency mbs holdings. finally, the manager provided an update on the srf. the desk had onboarded four depository institutions as counterparties and noted that a number of additional banks were currently under review. the desk planned to adjust the counterparty eligibility requirements in page 4 federal open market committee  early april to make the srf accessible to a broader range of banks, in line with the committee’s intention to expand eligibility over time and with efforts to ensure that desk counterparty policies promote a fair and competitive marketplace. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. no intervention operations occurred in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. plans for reducing the size of the balance sheet participants continued their discussion of topics related to plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet in a manner consistent with the approach described in the principles for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that the committee released following its january meeting. the participants’ discussion was preceded by a staff presentation that reviewed the committee’s 2017–19 experience with balance sheet reduction and presented a range of possible options for reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings over time in a predictable manner. all of the options featured a more rapid pace of balance sheet runoff than in the 2017–19 episode. the options differed primarily with respect to the size of the monthly caps for securities redemptions in the soma portfolio. the presentation addressed the potential implications of each option for the path of the balance sheet during and after runoff. the staff presentation also featured alternative approaches the committee could consider with respect to soma holdings of treasury bills as well as alternative ways the committee could eventually slow and then stop balance sheet runoff as the size of the soma portfolio approached levels consistent with the committee’s ample-reserves framework for policy implementation. in their discussion, all participants agreed that elevated inflation and tight labor market conditions warranted commencement of balance sheet runoff at a coming meeting, with a faster pace of decline in securities holdings than over the 2017–19 period. participants reaffirmed that the federal reserve’s securities holdings should be reduced over time in a predictable manner primarily by adjusting the amounts reinvested of principal payments received from securities held in the soma. principal payments received from securities held in the soma would be reinvested to the extent they exceeded monthly caps. several participants remarked that they would be comfortable with relatively high monthly caps or no caps. some other participants noted that monthly caps for treasury securities should take into consideration potential risks to market functioning. participants generally agreed that monthly caps of about $60 billion for treasury securities and about $35 billion for agency mbs would likely be appropriate. participants also generally agreed that the caps could be phased in over a period of three months or modestly longer if market conditions warrant. participants discussed the approach toward implementing caps for treasury securities and the role that the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury bills might play in the committee’s plan to reduce the size of the balance sheet. most participants judged that it would be appropriate to redeem coupon securities up to the cap amount each month and to redeem treasury bills in months when treasury coupon principal payments were below the cap. under this approach, redemption of treasury bills would typically bring the total amount of treasury redemptions up to the monthly cap. several participants remarked that reducing the federal reserve’s treasury bill holdings over time would be appropriate because treasury bills are highly valued as safe and liquid assets by the private sector, and the treasury could increase bill issuance to the public as soma bill holdings decline. in addition, participants generally noted that maintaining large holdings of treasury bills is not necessary under the federal reserve’s ample-reserves operating framework; in the previous scarce-reserves regime, treasury bill holdings were useful as a tool that could be used to drain reserves from the banking system when necessary to control short-term interest rates. a couple of participants commented that holding some treasury bills could be appropriate if the federal reserve wished to keep its treasury portfolio neutral with respect to the universe of outstanding treasury securities. with respect to the federal reserve’s agency mbs redemptions, participants generally noted that mbs principal prepayments would likely run under the proposed monthly cap in a range of plausible interest rate scenarios but that the cap could guard against outsized reductions in the federal reserve’s agency mbs holdings in scenarios with especially high prepayments. some participants noted that under the proposed approach to running off treasury and agency securities primarily through adjustments to reinvestments, agency mbs holdings would still make up a sizable share of the federal reserve’s asset holdings for many years. participants generally agreed that after balance sheet runoff was well under way, it will be appropriate to consider sales of agency mbs to enable suitable progress toward a longer-run soma portfolio composed primarily of minutes of the meeting of march 15–16, 2022 page 5  treasury securities. a committee decision to implement a program of agency mbs sales would be announced well in advance. several participants noted the significant uncertainty around the future level of reserves that would be consistent with the committee’s ample-reserves operating framework. against this backdrop, participants generally agreed that it would be appropriate to first slow and then stop the decline in the size of the balance sheet when reserve balances were above the level the committee judged to be consistent with ample reserves, thereby allowing reserves to decline more gradually as nonreserve liabilities increased over time. participants agreed that lessons learned from the previous balance sheet reduction episode should inform the committee’s current approach to reaching ample reserve levels and that close monitoring of money market conditions and indicators of near-ample reserves should help inform adjustments to the pace of runoff. a couple of participants noted that the establishment of the srf, which did not exist in the previous runoff episode, could address unexpected money market pressures that might emerge if the committee adopted an approach to balance sheet reduction in which reserves declined relatively rapidly, but several others noted that the facility was not intended as a substitute for ample reserves. participants generally agreed that it was important for the committee to be prepared to adjust any of the details of its approach to reducing the size of the balance sheet in light of economic and financial developments. no decision regarding the committee’s plan to reduce the federal reserve’s balance sheet was made at this meeting, but participants agreed they had made substantial progress on the plan and that the committee was well placed to begin the process of reducing the size of the balance sheet as early as after the conclusion of its upcoming meeting in may. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the march 15– 16 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) was increasing in the first quarter at a pace that was slower than the rapid gain posted in the fourth quarter of 2021. labor market conditions improved further in january and february, and indicators of labor compensation continued to show robust increases. consumer price inflation through january—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—remained elevated. total nonfarm payroll employment grew strongly in january and february. the unemployment rate edged down, on net, from 3.9 percent in december to 3.8 percent in february. the unemployment rate for african americans and for hispanics declined over this period; however, both rates remained noticeably higher than the national average. the labor force participation rate increased in february, as did the employment-to-population ratio. the private-sector job openings rate in january, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, was little changed, on net, from its november level and remained well above its pre-pandemic level; the quits rate also remained elevated. average hourly earnings rose 5.1 percent over the 12 months ending in february, about the same as its year-earlier pace, with widespread increases across industries. consumer prices continued to rise rapidly. total pce price inflation was 6.1 percent over the 12 months ending in january, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 5.2 percent over the same period. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 3.5 percent in january, 1.8 percentage points higher than its year-earlier rate of increase. in february, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 7.9 percent, while core cpi inflation was 6.4 percent over the same period. the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, had largely leveled off over the fall and was close to its 2014 average. real pce appeared to be rising at a faster pace in the first quarter of 2022 than in the fourth quarter of 2021 as social distancing unwound further. housing demand remained strong, though activity in the residential housing sector continued to be restrained by shortages of construction materials, buildable lots, and other inputs. available indicators suggested that growth in business fixed investment was picking up in the first quarter as growth in nonresidential structures investment turned positive. available data suggested that motor vehicle production declined sharply in february as ongoing shortages of semiconductors and other supply chain problems continued to restrain output. outside of the motor vehicle sector, manufacturing production appeared to have moved up over january and february; however, this increase did not appear to reflect a substantial reduction in supply bottlenecks, as many indicators of the state of page 6 federal open market committee  bottlenecks showed little sign of improvement over this period. in particular, materials inputs such as electronic components and aluminum remained in short supply, while broad measures of industrial input prices remained elevated. separately, transportation and distribution activity continued to be held back by port congestion and a shortage of truck drivers. driven by economic data releases and fomc communications that were viewed as implying a more rapid removal of monetary policy accommodation than previously expected. domestic equity indexes declined modestly, while those in europe fell noticeably. financing conditions remained accommodative, although borrowing costs increased further. available indicators suggested that real government purchases were little changed in the first quarter after declining in the fourth quarter of 2021. although real state and local purchases appeared to be rising, federal defense purchases appeared to be contracting further in the first quarter. investors interpreted incoming economic data and federal reserve communications as implying a more rapid removal of monetary policy accommodation than they had previously expected. on net, the expected path of the federal funds rate implied by financial market quotes—unadjusted for term premiums—rose significantly, along with the yields on nominal treasury securities, since the previous fomc meeting. near-term inflation compensation implied by treasury inflationprotected securities rose sharply, reflecting the higherthan-anticipated cpi releases and surging energy prices following the russian invasion of ukraine. the u.s. international trade deficit widened at the end of last year to a record high and surpassed that high at the beginning of this year. imports of goods grew rapidly again in january, led by increases in consumer goods, while exports of goods fell back slightly from elevated fourth-quarter levels. shipping congestion and other bottlenecks continued to restrain the level of trade in goods. services exports and imports fell back in january relative to december, reflecting a reduction in travel to and from the united states. because international travel remained depressed, services trade was still very low relative to pre-pandemic norms. incoming data suggested that the rapid spread of the omicron variant had tempered the foreign recovery around the turn of the year. purchasing managers indexes were consistent with the omicron wave having a notable effect on services activity but a rather muted effect on manufacturing activity and supplier delivery times. moreover, with covid-19 cases having fallen in many regions, authorities had already eased restrictions and social mobility had recovered, except in china, where lockdowns were recently reimposed. the russian invasion of ukraine, however, constituted another negative shock to the global economy by pushing up commodity prices further, hurting global risk sentiment, and exacerbating supply bottlenecks. inflation abroad continued to rise, driven by recovering global demand, rising retail energy and food prices, and ongoing strains on global supply chains; the effects of the russian invasion contributed to some of these inflationary pressures. staff review of the financial situation financial markets were highly volatile over the intermeeting period, with strained liquidity in some markets. the russian invasion of ukraine led to periods of particularly elevated volatility and deteriorating investor risk sentiment. nominal treasury yields and the expected path of policy rose during the intermeeting period, spreads of investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds widened noticeably since the previous fomc meeting and ended the period close to the medians of their historical distributions. spreads of municipal bonds also widened significantly across credit categories. broad equity indexes declined modestly, on net, amid significant fluctuations. equity prices increased early in the period because of stronger-than-anticipated corporate earnings and economic data releases, but they retraced these gains as investor risk sentiment deteriorated following the ukraine invasion. the one-month optionimplied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—surged briefly immediately following the invasion but ended the intermeeting period slightly lower on net. foreign asset prices were highly volatile over the intermeeting period in response to geopolitical developments, central bank communications, and rising inflation concerns. news related to russia’s invasion of ukraine, in particular, contributed to decreases in major foreign equity indexes, especially in europe, and a moderate increase in the broad dollar index. despite downward pressure from the geopolitical events, afe sovereign yields increased notably, on net, on higher-than-expected inflation readings and central bank communications that were perceived as less accommodative than expected. eme sovereign spreads widened, and emededicated funds experienced moderate portfolio outflows, which increased after the russian invasion. even so, financial conditions among emes—including fund flows and the relative strength of local currencies outside of europe—were resilient compared with past episodes minutes of the meeting of march 15–16, 2022 page 7  of global turbulence, reflecting in part higher commodity prices and monetary policy tightening by eme central banks. liquidity conditions became strained in some financial markets during the intermeeting period. market depth—a gauge of the ability to transact in large volumes at quotes posted by market makers—deteriorated in u.s. treasury, u.s. equity, and crude oil markets. trading volumes generally remained within normal ranges in most markets and increased above normal levels in treasury markets later in the period. bid–ask spreads did not increase notably in most markets. however, investors reported that strained liquidity at times amplified the volatility of price moves and may have contributed to the particularly large swings in treasury yields and equity prices late in the intermeeting period. short-term funding markets were mostly stable over the intermeeting period, although spreads in some segments widened. the effective federal funds rate and the secured overnight financing rate generally held steady at 8 basis points and 5 basis points, respectively. overnight rates on commercial paper (cp) across most sectors also held steady, although rates and spreads on longer-tenor cp and negotiable certificates of deposit increased amid the escalation of the ukraine invasion. spreads between three-month forward rate agreements and overnight index swaps widened as borrowers increased precautionary issuance of longer-tenor debt while money market investors preferred shorter-duration investments. on rrp take-up was little changed, averaging about $1.6 trillion. in domestic credit markets, credit remained broadly available for most types of borrowers during the intermeeting period. nonfinancial gross corporate bond issuance slowed noticeably in january and february, reflecting lower demand for credit due to rising borrowing costs and elevated issuance over the past two years. however, issuance rebounded to healthy levels in march for investment-grade firms, with a few high-yield firms also raising funds. leveraged loan issuance was strong in january and february. small business loan originations in december roughly matched pre-pandemic levels. the share of small firms that actively sought financing in the past few months and reported that it was more difficult to acquire credit compared with three months earlier remained very low. for households, both nonmortgage and mortgage credit remained accommodative. credit card balances increased significantly in the fourth quarter, and auto credit outstanding grew at a moderate pace in december. the number of mortgage rate locks for home purchases through february was elevated relative to prepandemic levels. mortgage credit for households with low credit scores continued to ease through february but remained tighter than before the pandemic. the credit quality of large nonfinancial corporations and municipalities remained strong over the intermeeting period. the volumes of credit rating upgrades for corporate and municipal bonds outpaced those of downgrades moderately in january and february. default rates on corporate bonds, municipal bonds, and leveraged loans remained very low; most market indicators of future expected default rates for corporate bonds and leveraged loans also remained low. credit quality in the commercial real estate sector continued to show some signs of stress. delinquency rates for commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) collateralized by hotel and retail properties continued to decline in january but remained well above pre-pandemic levels, while those for cmbs in the office sector increased somewhat in january but remained fairly low by historical standards. for households, credit quality remained fairly healthy. delinquency rates for mortgages, which include loans in forbearance and other loans behind on payments, continued to trend down through december, while those for prime auto loan and prime credit card borrowers remained flat in december. for nonprime borrowers, delinquency rates rose in december, although they remained subdued by historical standards. information on borrowing costs through february and early march suggested that the events surrounding russia’s invasion of ukraine did not have a significant effect on financing conditions during the intermeeting period. borrowing costs continued to increase in many sectors but remained low relative to their historical distributions. spreads in the corporate bond, municipal bond, and cmbs markets generally rose to somewhat above their pre-pandemic levels, reflecting heightened geopolitical risks, uncertainty about the outlook for monetary policy, and elevated financial market volatility. residential mortgage rates increased, mostly as a result of widening mbs spreads, which market participants attributed mainly to the tapering of the federal reserve’s agency mbs purchases and uncertainty surrounding the market supply of agency mbs that would accompany balance sheet runoff by the federal reserve. interest rates on page 8 federal open market committee  new credit cards rose to roughly their pre-pandemic levels, while rates on auto loans also rose slightly but remained significantly below pre-pandemic levels. staff economic outlook the near-term projection for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the march fomc meeting was weaker than in january, reflecting the anticipated economic effects of the conflict in ukraine and financial conditions that were expected to be less supportive than previously assumed. for 2022 as a whole, real gdp growth was projected to step down markedly from its rapid 2021 pace before picking up slightly in 2023 as the continued resolution of supply constraints provided a small boost to growth. real gdp growth was expected to slow further in 2024 to a pace that was in line with potential growth. however, the level of real gdp was expected to remain well above potential over the projection period, and labor market conditions were expected to remain very tight. term inflation expectations to become unanchored was seen as another upside risk to the inflation projection. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2022 through 2024 and over the longer run based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. the staff’s near-term projection for pce price inflation was revised up considerably relative to january. the upward revision reflected the staff’s reaction to the persistently high and broad-based levels of domestic inflation, import price inflation, and wage growth that had been observed, as well as the staff’s expectation that the upward pressure on inflation from supply and demand imbalances would last longer than previously assumed. in addition, total pce price inflation was further revised up to reflect higher expected paths for consumer energy and food prices. all told, total pce price inflation was projected to be 4 percent in 2022. pce price inflation was then expected to slow to 2.3 percent in 2023 and to 2.1 percent in 2024 as food, energy, and import price inflation moved lower and as supply and demand imbalances were resolved. in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. job gains had been strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. inflation remained elevated, reflecting continued supply and demand imbalances, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. with appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, participants expected inflation to return to the committee’s 2 percent objective over time and the labor market to remain strong. participants recognized that the invasion of ukraine by russia was causing tremendous human and economic hardship for the ukrainian people. they judged that the implications of the war for the u.s. economy were highly uncertain, but in the near term, the invasion and related events were likely to create significant additional upward pressure on inflation and could weigh on economic activity. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks to the inflation projection were skewed to the upside. the covid-19 pandemic remained a source of downside risk to activity, while the possibility of more severe and more persistent supply issues was viewed as posing an additional downside risk to activity and an upside risk to inflation. the russian invasion of ukraine was perceived as adding to the uncertainty around the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as the conflict carried the risk of further exacerbating supply chain disruptions and of putting additional upward pressure on inflation by boosting the prices for energy, food, and other key commodities. finally, the possibility that continued high inflation would cause longer- with regard to the economic outlook, participants noted that real gdp growth had slowed from its rapid pace in the fourth quarter of 2021, largely reflecting weaker inventory investment, but consumption and business investment continued to rise solidly. the omicron variant left only a mild and brief imprint on economic data, as households and firms appeared resilient to this wave of the virus. relative to their december forecasts, participants had revised down their projections for real gdp growth this year, reflecting factors such as a slowdown in inventory investment from its strong pace late last year, reduced fiscal and monetary policy accommodation, and the russian invasion of ukraine, which had led to higher prices of energy and other commodities, increased uncertainty, and weighed on broader financial minutes of the meeting of march 15–16, 2022 page 9  conditions and consumer sentiment. even so, participants judged that economic fundamentals remained solid and that they expected above-trend growth to continue, sustaining a strong labor market. participants commented that demand for labor continued to substantially exceed available supply across many parts of the economy and that their business contacts continued to report difficulties in hiring and retaining workers. participants observed that various indicators pointed to a very tight labor market. employment growth remained strong through the omicron wave. a couple of participants highlighted that the annual benchmark revision to the establishment survey employment data revealed stronger employment growth in the second half of 2021 than was initially reported. the unemployment rate had fallen to a post-pandemic low, and quits and job openings were at all-time highs. although payroll employment remained below its pre-pandemic level, the shortfall was concentrated in a few sectors and reflected a shortage of workers rather than insufficient demand for labor. consistent with a tight labor market, nominal wages were rising at the fastest pace in many years. while wage gains thus far had been the strongest among the lowest quartile of earners and among production and supervisory workers, wage pressures had begun to spread across the income and skill distributions. many participants commented that they expected the labor market to remain strong and wage pressures to remain elevated. a few participants noted that there were signs that the pandemic-related factors that had held back labor supply might be abating and pointed to the notable increase in the labor force participation rate among prime-age men in february. participants remarked that recent inflation readings continued to significantly exceed the committee’s longerrun goal and noted that developments associated with russia’s invasion of ukraine, including the related surge in energy prices, will add to near-term inflation pressures. some participants noted that elevated inflation had continued to broaden from goods into services, especially rents, and into sectors that had not yet experienced large price increases, such as education, apparel, and health care. a few participants also noted that the number of spending categories experiencing inflation rates above 4 percent had continued to rise, or that the trimmed mean inflation measure from the federal reserve bank of dallas had risen to its highest level since the early 1980s. many participants indicated that their business contacts continued to report substantial increases in wages and input prices that were being passed through into higher prices to their customers without any significant decrease in demand. participants commented on a few factors that might lead the high inflation readings to persist, including strong aggregate demand, significant increases in energy and commodity prices, and supply chain disruptions that were likely to require a lengthy period to resolve. in addition, some participants noted that recent higher inflation could affect future inflation dynamics. for example, a few participants commented that persistently high inflation readings might lead businesses, when setting prices, to be more attentive to aggregate inflation or more willing to raise prices. in addition, a couple of other participants noted that some household survey data suggested that near-term consumer inflation expectations have become more sensitive to actual inflation readings since the beginning of the pandemic. a few participants commented that both survey- and market-based measures of shortterm inflation expectations were at historically high levels. several other participants noted that longer-term measures of inflation expectations from households, professional forecasters, and market participants still appeared to remain well anchored, which—together with appropriate monetary policy and an eventual easing of supply constraints—would support a return of inflation over time to levels consistent with the committee’s longer-run goal. participants agreed that developments surrounding the russian invasion of ukraine, including the resulting sanctions, were adding to inflation pressures and posing upside risks to the inflation outlook. participants noted that russia and ukraine were major suppliers of various commodities used in the production of energy, food, and some industrial inputs. a continued cutoff of that supply from the world market would further push up prices for those commodities and, over time, lead to price increases in downstream industries. the invasion had also exacerbated the disruptions of supply chains. participants commented that, by leading to higher energy and food prices, weighing on consumer sentiment, and contributing to tighter financial conditions, the invasion also negatively affected the growth outlook. a few participants highlighted additional downside risks to growth associated with the war, such as the risk that a more protracted conflict than the public currently expects could lead to much tighter global financial conditions or other disruptions. a couple of participants commented that the increased uncertainty might lead businesses and consumers to reduce spending, though their business contacts currently were not seeing signs of such shifts or expecting a significant pullback in demand. page 10 federal open market committee  several participants judged that the upside risk to inflation associated with the war appeared more significant than the downside risk to growth, as inflation was already high, the united states had a relatively low level of financial and trade exposure to russia, and the u.s. economy was well positioned to absorb additional adverse demand shocks. in their discussion of risks to the outlook, participants agreed that uncertainty regarding the path of inflation was elevated and that risks to inflation were weighted to the upside. participants cited several such risks, including ongoing supply bottlenecks and rising energy and commodity prices, both of which were exacerbated by the russian invasion; recent covid-related lockdowns in china that had the potential to further disrupt supply chains; and the possibility that longer-run inflation expectations might become unanchored. uncertainty about real activity was also seen as elevated. various participants noted downside risks to the outlook, including risks associated with the russian invasion, a broad tightening in global financial conditions, and a prolonged rise in energy prices. in their consideration of the appropriate stance of monetary policy, all participants concurred that the u.s. economy was very strong, with an extremely tight labor market, and that inflation was high and well above the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to begin a process of removing policy accommodation by raising the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. they further judged that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be warranted to achieve the committee’s objectives. participants also agreed that reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet would play an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy and that they expected it would be appropriate to begin this process at a coming meeting, possibly as soon as in may. participants judged that the firming of monetary policy, alongside an eventual waning of supply–demand imbalances, would help to keep longer-term inflation expectations anchored and bring inflation down over time to levels consistent with the committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal while sustaining a strong labor market. many participants noted that—with inflation well above the committee’s objective, inflationary risks to the upside, and the federal funds rate well below participants’ estimates of its longer-run level—they would have preferred a 50 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. a number of these participants indicated, however, that, in light of greater near-term uncertainty associated with russia’s invasion of ukraine, they judged that a 25 basis point increase would be appropriate at this meeting. many participants noted that one or more 50 basis point increases in the target range could be appropriate at future meetings, particularly if inflation pressures remained elevated or intensified. a number of participants noted that the committee’s previous communications had already contributed to a tightening of financial conditions, as evident in the notable increase in longer-term interest rates over recent months. all participants indicated their strong commitment and determination to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. in that context, participants judged that the committee’s approach of commencing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate, and indicating that ongoing increases were likely, was fully warranted. participants judged that it would be appropriate to move the stance of monetary policy toward a neutral posture expeditiously. they also noted that, depending on economic and financial developments, a move to a tighter policy stance could be warranted. a few participants judged that, at the current juncture, a significant risk facing the committee was that elevated inflation and inflation expectations could become entrenched if the public began to question the committee’s resolve to adjust the stance of policy as appropriate to achieve the committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective for inflation. these participants suggested that expediting the removal of policy accommodation would reduce this risk while also leaving the committee well positioned to adjust the stance of policy if geopolitical and other developments led to a more rapid dissipation of demand pressures than expected. participants agreed that the economic outlook was highly uncertain and that policy decisions must take account of the state of financial markets and the economy. as always, the committee would need to be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy in response to the evolving economic outlook and the risks to the outlook. in this regard, participants noted that developments associated with russia’s invasion of ukraine posed heightened risks for both the united states and the global economy. against this backdrop, all participants judged that risk management would be important in deciding upon the appropriate stance of monetary policy, and that policy also would need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. in particular, all participants underscored the need to remain attentive minutes of the meeting of march 15–16, 2022 page 11  to the risks of further upward pressure on inflation and longer-run inflation expectations. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that indicators of economic activity and employment had continued to strengthen. job gains had been strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. members also agreed that inflation remained elevated, reflecting continued supply and demand imbalances, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. members agreed that geopolitical developments warranted several changes to the postmeeting statement. they concurred that the invasion of ukraine by russia was causing tremendous human and economic hardship, and they agreed to update the statement to recognize this tragic situation. members agreed that the implications of the war for the u.s. economy were highly uncertain, but they judged that, in the near term, the invasion and related events were likely to create additional upward pressure on inflation and weigh on economic activity. in their assessment of the monetary policy stance necessary for achieving the committee’s maximumemployment and price-stability goals, members agreed that with appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, they expected inflation to return to the committee’s 2 percent objective and the labor market to remain strong. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent and anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate. one member preferred to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 0.5 percentage point to ½ to ¾ percent at this meeting in light of elevated inflation pressures. with regard to reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, all members agreed that they had made substantial progress on arriving at a plan specifying the steps the committee would take. they expected that, depending on economic and financial conditions, beginning the process of reducing the size of the balance sheet would be appropriate at a coming meeting, possibly as early as at the committee’s may meeting. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. they also concurred that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective march 17, 2022, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of ¼ to ½ percent. • conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 0.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the percounterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • roll over at auction all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities (mbs) in agency mbs. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen. job gains have been strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined substantially. inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and page 12 federal open market committee  demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. the invasion of ukraine by russia is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. the implications for the u.s. economy are highly uncertain, but in the near term the invasion and related events are likely to create additional upward pressure on inflation and weigh on economic activity. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, the committee expects inflation to return to its 2 percent objective and the labor market to remain strong. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. in addition, the committee expects to begin reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities at a coming meeting. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, esther l. 5 in taking this action, the board approved requests to establish the rate submitted by the boards of directors of the federal reserve banks of boston, philadelphia, cleveland, richmond, atlanta, chicago, st. louis, minneapolis, kansas city, and san francisco. this vote also encompassed approval by the board of governors of the establishment of a 0.50 percent primary credit rate by the remaining federal reserve banks, effective on the later of march 17, 2022, and the date such reserve banks inform the secretary of the board of such a george, patrick harker, loretta j. mester, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: james bullard. patrick harker voted as an alternate member at this meeting. president bullard preferred at this meeting to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 0.5 percentage point to ½ to ¾ percent in light of elevated inflation pressures. to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 0.40 percent, effective march 17, 2022. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 0.50 percent, effective march 17, 2022. 5 it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, may 3–4, 2022. 6 the meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. on march 16, 2022. notation votes by notation vote completed on february 15, 2022, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on january 25–26, 2022. by notation vote completed on february 17, 2022, the committee unanimously approved the investment trading policy for fomc officials and related revisions to the program for security of fomc information. in conjunction with the notation vote, all non-voting participants also expressed support for the policy and related revisions to the program.  james a. clouse secretary request. (secretary’s note: subsequently, the federal reserve banks of new york and dallas were informed of the secretary of the board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 0.50 percent, effective march 17, 2022.) the second vote of the board also encompassed approval of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates. 6 an error in this date was corrected on april 6, 2022, shortly after publication. 
 4, 2022 chair powell. good afternoon. it’s nice to see everyone in person for the first time in a couple years. before i go into the details of today’s meeting, i’d like to take this opportunity to speak directly to the american people. inflation is much too high, and we understand the hardship it is causing, and we’re moving expeditiously to bring it back down. we have both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price stability on behalf of american families and businesses. the economy and the country have been through a lot over the past two years and have proved resilient. it is essential that we bring inflation down if we are to have a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. from the standpoint of our congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the current picture is plain to see: the labor market is extremely tight, and inflation is much too high. against this backdrop, today the fomc raised its policy interest rate by ½ percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target rate for the federal funds rate will be appropriate. in addition, we are beginning the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. i’ll have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. after expanding at a robust 5½ percent pace last year, overall economic activity edged down in the first quarter. underlying momentum remains strong, however, as the decline largely reflected swings in inventories and net exports—two volatile categories whose movements last quarter likely carry little signal for future growth. indeed, household spending and business fixed investment continued to expand briskly.  the labor market has continued to strengthen and is extremely tight. over the first three months of the year, employment rose by nearly 1.7 million jobs. in march, the unemployment rate hit a post-pandemic, and near-five-decade, low of 3.6 percent. improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for african americans and hispanics. labor demand is very strong, and, while labor force participation has increased somewhat, labor supply remains subdued. employers are having difficulties filling job openings, and wages are rising at the fastest pace in many years. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. over the 12 months ending in march, total pce prices rose 6.6 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 5.2 percent. aggregate demand is strong, and bottlenecks and supply constraints are limiting how quickly production can respond. disruptions to supply have been larger, and longer lasting, than anticipated, and price pressures have spread to a broader range of goods and services. the surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from russia’s invasion of ukraine is creating additional upward pressure on inflation. and covid-related lockdowns in china are likely to further exacerbate supply chain disruptions as well. russia’s invasion of ukraine is causing tremendous loss and hardship, and our thoughts and sympathies are with the people of ukraine. our job is to consider the implications for the u.s. economy, which remain highly uncertain. in addition to the effects on inflation, the invasion and related events are likely to restrain economic activity abroad and further disrupt supply chains, creating spillovers to the u.s. economy through trade and other channels.  the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to restoring price stability. against the backdrop of the rapidly evolving economic environment, our policy has been adapting, and it will continue to do so. at today’s meeting, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ½ percentage point and stated that it “anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate.” we also decided to begin the process of reducing the size of our balance sheet, which will play an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. we are on a path to move our policy rate expeditiously to more normal levels. assuming that economic and financial conditions evolve in line with expectations, there is a broad sense on the committee that additional 50-basis-point increases should be on the table at the next couple of meetings. we will make our decisions meeting by meeting as we learn from incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. and we will continue to communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. with regard to our balance sheet, we also issued our specific plans for reducing our securities holdings. consistent with the principles we issued in january, we intend to significantly reduce the size of our balance sheet over time in a predictable manner by allowing the principal payments from our securities holdings to roll off the balance sheet, up to monthly cap amounts. for treasury securities, the cap will be $30 billion per month for three months and  will then increase to $60 billion per month. the decline in holdings of treasury securities under this monthly cap will include treasury coupon securities and, to the extent that coupon securities are less than the monthly cap, treasury bills. for agency mortgage-backed securities, the cap will be $17.5 billion per month for three months and will then increase to $35 billion per month. at the current level of mortgage rates, the actual pace of agency mbs runoff would likely be less than this monthly cap amount. our balance sheet decisions are guided by our maximum- employment and price-stability goals. and, in that regard, we will be prepared to adjust any of the details of our approach in light of economic and financial developments. making appropriate monetary policy in this uncertain environment requires a recognition that the economy often evolves in unexpected ways. inflation has obviously surprised to the upside over the past year, and further surprises could be in store. we therefore will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. and we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty to what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain time. we are highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee is determined to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. the american economy is very strong and well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you, and i look forward to your questions. nick timiraos. nick timiraos, the wall street journal. chair powell, the unemployment rate at 3.6 percent in march is now essentially at the level that the committee had expected would prevail over the next three years and at the bottom end of fomc participants’  projections for the longer-run rate that you submitted in the projections at the last meeting. how has your outlook for further declines in the unemployment rate changed since march? what does this imply for your inflation forecast? and how has your level of confidence changed with regard to the feasibility of slowing hiring without pushing the economy into recession? thanks. chair powell. thank you. so you’re right—3.6 percent unemployment is just about as low as it’s been in 50 years. and i would say that i expect, and committee members generally expect, that we’ll get some additional participation. so people will be coming back into the labor force. we’ve seen that particularly among prime-age people. and that will, of course, tend to hold the unemployment rate up a little bit. i would also expect, though, that job creation will slow. job creation has been, you know, more than half a million per month in recent months—very, very strong, particularly for this stage of the economy. and so we think— with fiscal policy less supportive, with monetary policy less supportive, we think that job creation will slow as well. so it is certainly possible that the unemployment would go down further. but so i would expect those to be relatively limited because of the additional supply and also just the slowing in job creation. implications for inflation—really, the wages matter a fair amount for companies, particularly in the service sector. wages are running high, the highest they’ve run in quite some time. and they are one good example, or good illustration, really, of how tight the labor market really is, the fact that wages are running at the highest level in many decades. and that’s because of an imbalance between supply and demand in the labor market. so we think through our policies—through further healing in the labor market, higher rates, for example, of vacancy filling and things like that, and more people coming back in—we’d like to think that supply and demand will come back into balance and that, therefore, wage inflation will moderate to still  high levels of wage increases, but ones that are more consistent with 2 percent inflation. that’s our expectation. your third question was? nick timiraos. your level of confidence that you can slow hiring without pushing the economy into a downturn. chair powell. so i guess i would say it this way: there’s a path. there’s a path by which we would be able to have demand moderate in the labor market and therefore have vacancies come down without unemployment going up, because vacancies are at such an extraordinarily high level. there’re 1.9 vacancies for every unemployed person, 11.5 million vacancies, 6 million unemployed people. so we haven’t been in that place on the vacancy, sort of the vacancy/unemployed curve, the beveridge curve. we haven’t been at that sort of level of a ratio in the modern era. so, in principle, it seems as though by moderating demand, we could see vacancies come down and, as a result—and they could come down fairly significantly and, i think, put supply and demand at least closer together than they are. and that would give us a chance to get inflation down, get wages down, and then get inflation down without having to slow the economy and have a recession and have unemployment rise materially. so there’s a path to that. now, i would say, i think we have a good chance to have a soft or softish landing or outcome, if you will. and i’ll give you a couple of reasons for that. one is, households and businesses are in very strong financial shape. you’re looking at, you know, excess savings on balance sheets—excess in the sense that they’re substantially larger than the prior trend. businesses are in good financial shape. the labor market is, as i mentioned, very, very strong. and so it doesn’t seem to be anywhere close to a downturn. therefore, the economy is strong and is well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. so, but i’ll say, i do expect that this  will be very challenging; it’s not going to be easy. and it may well depend, of course, on events that are not under our control. but our job is to use our tools to try to achieve that outcome, and that’s what we’re going to do. michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. steve liesman, cnbc. thanks for taking my question, mr. chairman. you talked about using 50-basis-point rate hikes or the possibility of them in coming meetings. might there be something larger than 50? is 75 or a percentage point possible? and perhaps you could walk us through your calibration. why one month should—or one meeting should we expect a 50? why something bigger? why something smaller? what is the reasoning for the level of the amount of tightening? thank you. chair powell. sure. so a 75-basis-point increase is not something the committee is actively considering. what we are doing is, we raised [the funds rate by] 50 basis points today. and we’ve said that, again, assuming that economic and financial conditions evolve in ways that are consistent with our expectations, there’s a broad sense on the committee that additional 50- basis-point increases should be on the table for the next couple of meetings. so we’re going to make those decisions at the meetings, of course, and we’ll be paying close attention to the incoming data and the evolving outlook as well as to financial conditions. and, finally, of course, we will be communicating to the public about what our expectations will be as they evolve. so the test is really just as i laid it out—economic and financial conditions evolving broadly in line with expectations. and, you know, i think expectations are that we’ll start to see inflation, you know, flattening out—and not necessarily declining yet, but we’ll see more evidence. we’ve seen some evidence that core pce inflation is perhaps either reaching a peak  or flattening out. we’ll want to know more than just some evidence. we’ll want to really feel like we’re making some progress there. and we’re going to make these decisions, and there’ll be a lot more information. i just think we want to see that information as we get there. it’s a very difficult environment to try to give forward guidance 60, 90 days in advance. there are just so many things that can happen in the economy and around the world. so, you know, we’re leaving ourselves room to look at the data and make a decision as we get there. steve liesman. i’m sorry, but if inflation is lower one month and the unemployment rate higher, would that be something that we would calibrate toward a lower increase in the funds rate? chair powell. i don’t think the one month is—no. no. one month’s reading doesn’t tell us much. you know, we‘d want to see evidence that inflation is moving in a direction that gives us more comfort. as i said, we’ve got two months now where core inflation is a little lower, but we’re not looking at that as a reason to take some comfort. you know, i think we need to really see that our expectation is being fulfilled—that inflation, in fact, is under control and starting to come down. but, again, it’s not like we would stop. we would just go back to 25-basis-point increases. it’ll be a judgment call when these meetings arrive. but, again, our expectation is, if we see what we expect to see, then we would have 50-basis-point increases on the table at the next two meetings. michelle smith. okay. let’s go to colby. colby smith. thank you. colby smith from the financial times. given the expectation that inflation will remain well above the fed’s target at year-end, what constitutes a neutral policy setting in terms of the fed funds rate? and to what extent is it appropriate for policy to move beyond that level at some point this year?  chair powell. so—neutral. when we talk about the neutral rate, we’re really talking about the rate that neither pushes economic activity higher nor slows it down. so it’s a concept, really. it’s not something we can identify with any precision. so we estimate it within broad bands of uncertainty. and the current estimates on the committee are sort of 2 to 3 percent. and also, that’s a longer-run estimate. that’s an estimate for an economy that’s at full employment and 2 percent inflation. so, really, what we’re doing is, we’re raising rates expeditiously to what we see as the broad range of plausible levels of neutral. but we know that there’s not a bright line drawn on the road that tells us when we get there. so we’re going to be looking at financial conditions, right? our policy affects financial conditions, and financial conditions affect the economy. so we’re going to be looking at the effect of our policy moves on financial conditions. are they tightening appropriately? and then we’re going to be looking at the effects on the economy. and we’re going to be making a judgment about whether we’ve done enough to get us on a path to restore price stability. it’s that. so if that path happens to involve levels that are higher than estimates of neutral, then we will not hesitate to go to those levels. we won’t. but, again, there’s a sort of false precision in the discussion that we as policymakers don’t really feel. you know, you’re going to raise rates, and you’re going to be kind of inquiring how that is affecting the economy through financial conditions. and, of course, if higher rates are required, then we won’t hesitate to deliver them. michelle smith. neil. neil irwin. thanks, chair powell. neil irwin with axios. do you see evidence that inflationary psychology is changing in areas like workers’ wage demands, businesses’  willingness to raise prices? do you see evidence that there is a psychological shift going on on inflation? thanks. chair powell. we don’t really see strong evidence of that yet, but that does not in any way make us comfortable. i think if you look at short-term inflation expectations, they’re quite elevated. and you can look at that and say, “well, that’s because people expect inflation to come down.” and, in fact, inflation expectations [at longer horizons] come down fairly sharply. longer-term inflation expectations have been reasonably stable but have moved up to—but only to levels where they were in 2014, by some measures. so you can look at that. and i think that’s a fair description of the picture. but it’s really about the risks. we don’t see a wage–price spiral. we see that companies have the ability to raise prices, and they’re doing that, but there have been price shocks. so i just think it takes you back to the basic point—was that we know we need to expeditiously move our policy rate up to ranges of more normal, neutral levels. and we need to look around and keep going if we don’t see that financial conditions have tightened adequately or that the economy is behaving in ways that suggest that we’re not where we need to be. so, again, you don’t see those things yet, but i would say there’s no basis for feeling comfortable about that. it’s a risk that we simply can’t run. we can’t allow a wage–price spiral to happen. and we can’t allow inflation expectations to become unanchored. it’s just something that we can’t allow to happen, and so we’ll look at it that way. michelle smith. jeanna. jeanna smialek. great. thanks, chair powell. jeanna smialek with the new york times. you mentioned in the statement both the upside risks to inflation from russia and china. obviously, those are very much supply shocks rather than demand side. and i wonder what you meant to convey by adding them—i wonder what you meant to convey by adding those.  chair powell. well. so our tools don’t really work on supply shocks. our tools work on demand. and to the extent we can’t affect, really, oil prices or other commodity prices or food prices and things like that, so we can’t affect those. but there’s a job to do on demand. and that—you can see that in the labor market, where demand is substantially in excess of supply of workers. and you can see it in the product markets as well. but i guess i’m just pointing out that—a couple of things. for both the situation in ukraine and the situation in china, they’re likely to, both, add to headline inflation. and people are going to be suffering from that, you know. people almost suffer more from food and energy shocks then, but—even though they don’t actually tell us much about the future path. so the second thing is that they’re both capable of preventing further progress in supply chains healing or even making supply chains temporarily worse. so they’re going to weigh on the process of global supply chain healing, which is going to affect broader inflation, too. so, in a way, they’re two further negative shocks that have hit really in the last, you know, 60 days, 90 days. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi. victoria guida from politico. i want to follow up on that, because you all have obviously highlighted that there are both supply and demand issues at play in inflation. and i’m just wondering, you know, if these supply chain issues continue because of russia, because of china, or just because these things take a while to work out, does getting back down to your 2 percent mandate require that the supply chain issues get resolved, since you can only handle the demand side, as you said? or will you have to crimp demand maybe even further if the supply chain issues don’t resolve themselves, in order to try and get inflation back down to where you want it to be?  chair powell. so, you know, i’ll just say: for now, we’re focused on doing the job we need to do on demand, and there’s plenty to be done there. again, if you look at it, it’s essentially almost two to one, job vacancies to unemployed people. there’s a lot of excess demand. there’re more than 5 million more employed plus job openings than there are the size of the labor force. so there’s an imbalance there that we have to do our work on. a very difficult situation—you know, you would look at core inflation, which wouldn’t include the commodity price shocks. and, you know, that’s one of the reasons we would tend to focus on that, because we can have more of an effect on that, but it would be a very difficult situation. i mean, we have to be sure that inflation expectations remain anchored. and i mean, that’s part of our job, too, so we’d be watching that carefully. and it puts any central bank in a very difficult situation. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. howard schneider with reuters. and thanks, and nice to be back. so two questions. one quick one. you’ve cited the 1.9 to 1 figure so often now, i’ve got to ask you, what would be a good figure there? what would you like to see that come down to to think that you’re in sort of a noninflationary vacancy-to-unemployed rate? and, secondly, on help from inflation, how much are you counting on wealth effects through stock market channels? equity markets broadly down quite a bit since late fall, first of the year—how are you mapping that into household consumption? have they come down enough? do you need another leg down in equity values to think that households are going to stop spending at the rate we need them to stop spending? chair powell. okay, so in terms of the vacancies-to-unemployment ratio, we don’t have a goal in mind. there’s no specific number that we’re saying, “we’ve got to get to that.”  it’s really, you’ve got to get to a place where the labor market appears to be more in balance. and that depends not only on the level of those things—it also, it depends on how well the matching functions in the labor markets are working. because, you know, the longer these expansions go on, you can get very efficient with all of that, and the beveridge curve shifts out. and that also tends to, you know, to help. so there isn’t a specific number. i will say we were— you know, i think, i think when we got to one-to-one in the, you know, in the late teens, we thought that was a pretty good number. but, again, we’re not shooting for any particular number. what we’d like to see is progress, but we’re not really looking at that. that’s an intermediate variable. we’re looking at wages, and we’re looking at, ultimately, inflation. so, you know, there are a bunch of channels through which policy works. you can think of it as, you know, interest-sensitive spending, and then you can think of another big one as asset values broadly. and, you know, there’re big models with, you know, a lot of different channels that are related to that. you know, we don’t focus on any one market—the equity market or the housing market—we focus on financial conditions broadly. so we wouldn’t be targeting any one market, as you suggest, for going up or down or taking a view on whether it’s at a good level or a bad level. we just would be looking at very broad measures of financial conditions—all the different financial conditions indexes, for example, which include equity. but they also include debt and other, many other things—credit spreads, things like that—too. michelle smith. rachel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. rachel siegel here from the washington post. to follow up from your message from the very beginning, what is your message to the american people about when they will start to feel the effects of, say, a 50-basis-point rate hike or multiple  hikes? how do you explain to them what that does to their grocery bill or their rent or their gas bill? thank you. chair powell. so, first, the first thing to say is that we understand. and some of us are old enough to have lived through high inflation, and many aren’t. but it’s very unpleasant. it’s just something people don’t—when they experience it for the first time, you’re paying more for the same thing. if you’re a normal economic person, then you probably don’t have that much extra to spend. and it’s immediately hitting your spending on groceries, on, you know, on gasoline, on energy, and things like that. so we understand the pain involved. so how do you get out of that? and it’s our job to make sure that inflation of that unpleasant, high nature doesn’t get entrenched in the economy. that’s what we’re here for, one of the main things we’re here for—perhaps the most fundamental thing we’re here for. and the way we do that is, we try to get supply and demand back in sync with each other, back in balance, so that the economy is under less stress and inflation will go down. now, the process of getting there involves higher rates—so higher mortgage rates, higher borrowing rates, and things like that. so it’s not going to be pleasant either. but in the end, everyone is better off. everyone— particularly people on fixed incomes and at the lower part of the income distribution are better off with stable prices. and so we need to do everything we can to restore stable prices. we’ll do it as quickly and effectively as we can. we think we have a good chance to do it without a significant increase in unemployment or, you know, a really sharp slowdown. but, ultimately, we think about the medium and longer term, and everyone will be better off if we can get this job done—the sooner, the better. michelle smith. thank you. edward.  edward lawrence. thank you, chair powell. edward lawrence with the fox business network. so you’ve talked in the past about consumer spending and how that drives the economy. are you concerned, with this high level of inflation, that the consumer will stop spending—and what’s the level of your concern—pushing us into a recession? chair powell. so the economy is doing fairly well. we expect growth to be solid this year. and we see, you know, household spending and business investment as fairly strong— and even in the first quarter, which was relatively slow on some other fronts. so, and the labor market—if you look at the labor market, for people who are out of work and looking, there are lots of job opportunities for—wages are moving up and at rates that haven’t been seen in quite a long time. so it’s a good time to be a worker looking to, you know, either change jobs or get a wage increase in your current job. so it’s a strong economy, and nothing about it suggests that it’s close to, or vulnerable to, a recession. now, of course, given events around the world and fading fiscal policy effects and higher rates, you could see some slower economic activity. certainly, it will not be—last year was an extraordinarily strong growth year as we recovered from the pandemic. as i mentioned, growth [was] over 5 percent. but most forecasters have growth this year at, you know, at a solid pace above 2 percent. edward lawrence. but we’ve talked with economists who have advised democrats and republican presidents who both said that the fed is so far behind the curve on inflation that a recession is inevitable. chair powell. so, and as i said, i think we have a good chance to restore price stability without a recession—without, you know, a severe downturn; without materially high, higher unemployment. and i mentioned the reasons for that. so i see a strong economy now. i see a very strong labor market, for example. businesses can’t find the people to hire—they can’t  find them. so, typically, in a recession, you would have unemployment. now you have surplus demand. so there should be room, in principle, to reduce that surplus demand without putting people out of work. the issue will come that we don’t have precision surgical tools. we have, essentially, interest rates, the balance sheet, and forward guidance, and they’re famously blunt tools. they’re not capable of surgical precision. so i would agree. no one thinks this will be easy, no one thinks it’s straightforward, but there is certainly a plausible path to this, and i do think we’ve got a good chance to do that. and, you know, our job is not to rate the chances—it is to try to achieve it. so that’s what we’re doing. there are a range of opinions, though, and that’s only appropriate. michelle smith. steve dorsey. steve dorsey. thanks. steve dorsey, cbs. you mentioned earlier, just now, fading fiscal policy. do you feel that the fed has been supported enough from policies at the white house and in congress in combating inflation? chair powell. you know, it’s really the fed that has responsibility for price stability. and we take whatever arrives at the fed in terms of fiscal activity, we take it as a given, and we don’t evaluate it—it’s not our job, really. we don’t have an oversight function there. and we look at it as our job, given all the factors that are happening, to try to sustain maximum employment and price stability. so if congress or the administration has ways to help with inflation, i would encourage that, but i’m not going to get into making recommendations or anything like that. it’s not, it’s really not our role—we need to stay in our lane and do our job. when we get inflation back under control, then maybe i can, you know, give other people advice [laughter]. right now, we need to focus on, just focus on doing our job. and i’ll stick to that. stick in our lane.  michelle smith. steve matthews. steve matthews. steve matthews with bloomberg news. a number of your colleagues have said that the rates will need to go above neutral into a restrictive territory to bring down inflation. one, do you agree with that? and, two, you’ve recently spoken in great praise of paul volcker, who had the courage to bring inflation down with recessions in the 1980s. and while it’s certainly not your desire—the soft landing is the big hope of everyone— would this fomc have the courage to endure recessions to bring inflation down if that were the only way necessary? chair powell. so i think it’s certainly possible that we’ll need to move policy to levels that we see as restrictive as opposed to just neutral. we can’t know that today. that decision is not in front of us today. if we do conclude that we need to do that, then we won’t hesitate to do it. i’ll say again, there’s no bright line, you know, that you’re stepping over. you’re really looking at what our policy stance is and what the market is forecasting for it. you’re looking at financial conditions and how that’s affecting the economy and making a judgment. you know, we won’t be arguing about whose model of the neutral rate is better than the other one. it’s much more about a practical application of our policy tools. and we’re absolutely prepared to do that. it—wouldn’t hesitate if that’s what it takes. so i am, of course—who isn’t an admirer of paul volcker? i shouldn’t be singled out in this respect. but i knew him just a little bit and have tremendous admiration for him. and i— but i would phrase it this way: he had the courage to do what he thought was the right thing. that’s what it was. it wasn’t a particular thing. it was that he always did—he always did—what he thought was the right thing. if you read his last autobiography, that really comes through. so that’s [what] the test is. it isn’t, will we do one particular thing?  i would say, we do see, though—we see restoring price stability as absolutely essential for the country in coming years. without price stability, the economy doesn’t work for anybody, really. and so it’s really essential, particularly for the labor market. if you think about it, like if you look at the last cycle, we had a very, very—longest expansion cycle in our recorded history. in the last two, three years, you had the benefits of this tight labor market going to people in the lower quartiles. and it was, you know, racial, wealth, and income—not wealth, but income gaps were coming down, wage gaps. so it’s a really great thing. we’d all love to get back to that place. but to get back to anything like that place, you need price stability. so, basically, we’ve been hit by historically large inflationary shocks since the pandemic. this isn’t anything like regular business. this is, we have a pandemic, we have the highest unemployment, you know, in—since the depression. then we have this outsized response from fiscal policy and monetary policy. then we have inflation. then we have a war in ukraine, which is cutting the commodity, you know, patch in half. and now we have these shutdowns in china. so it’s been a series of inflationary shocks that are really different from anything people have seen in 40 years. so we have to look through that and look at the economy that’s coming out the other side. and we need to somehow find price stability out of this. and it’s obviously going to be very challenging, i think, because you do have, you know, numerous supply shocks, which are famously difficult to deal with. so i guess that’s how i think about it. michelle smith. chris rugaber. christopher rugaber. thank you. chris rugaber, associated press. earlier, you just said that if necessary—i think were the words—that you would, or if it, if it turned out to be necessary, or you said that it’s possible that we’ll need to move policy to restrictive levels. given where inflation is and the hot economy is—or, certainly, the hot labor market, as you  described it—why still the hesitation? i mean, what else do you need to see in order to determine that? wouldn’t the fed naturally be looking to go to a restrictive level at this point? thank you. chair powell. so i didn’t—if i said “necessary,” i meant to say “appropriate.” we’re not going to be erecting a high barrier for this. it’s more, if we think it’s appropriate. you know, the point is, we’re a very long way from neutral now. we’re moving there expeditiously, and we’ll continue to do so. and we can’t make that decision, really, today. the decision for about how high to go will be on the table to be made when we reach neutral. and, you know, i expect we’ll get there expeditiously, as i’ve mentioned. so it’s not that we don’t want to—making that decision today wouldn’t really mean anything. but i’ll say again, if we do believe that it’s appropriate to go to those levels, we won’t hesitate. michelle smith. michael mckee. michael mckee. mike mckee from bloomberg television and radio. the balance sheet—why did you decide to wait until june 1st to begin letting securities roll off and not immediately start in the middle of this month, say? and do you have another, a newer or a better, estimate for the monetary policy impact of letting the balance sheet decline? and then, finally, i’m just curious why you felt the need to address the american people at the top of your remarks? are you concerned about fed credibility with the american people? chair powell. so, why june 1? it was just, pick a date, you know, and that happened to be the date that we picked. it was—nothing magic about it. you know, it’s not going to have any macroeconomic significance over time. we just picked that. sometimes we publish these calendars on the first day of the month, and that’s what we’re doing. i wouldn’t read anything into it. in terms of the effect, i mean, i would just stress how uncertain the effect  is of shrinking the balance sheet. you know, we run these models—and everyone does in this field—and make estimates of what will be, how do you measure, you know, a certain quantum of balance sheet shrinkage compared to quantitative easing? and, you know, these are very uncertain. i really can’t be any clearer. there won’t be any clearer [estimates]. you know, people estimate that, broadly, on the path we’re on—and this will be taken, probably, too seriously—but sort of ¼ percent, one rate increase over the course of a year at this pace. but i would just say, with very wide uncertainty bands—very wide. we don’t really know. there are other estimates that are much smaller than that, by the way. and some of you may read about that. that’s kind of a mainstream estimate. we know that it is part of returning to more normal, more neutral financial conditions. and, you know, our strategy is to set up a plan and have it operate and really have, you know, have the interest rate be the active tool of monetary policy. in terms of speaking to the american people, so i feel like sometimes i just want to remind us, really, that that’s who we work for, and that it’s inflation that people are feeling all over the country. and it’s very important that they know that we know how painful it is and that we are working hard on fixing it. i thought it was quite important to do that. and so that was really the thinking behind that. michael mckee. do you think the fed has a credibility problem? chair powell. no, i don’t. and a good example of why would be—in the fourth quarter of last year, as we started talking about tapering sooner and then raising rates this year, you saw financial markets reacting, you know, very appropriately. not to bless any particular day’s measure, but the way financial markets, the forward rate curve has tightened in response to our guidance and our actions really amplifies our policy. it’s—monetary policy is working through expectations now, to a very large extent. we’ve only done two rate increases. but if  you look at financial conditions, the two-year [rate] is at 280 [basis points] now. in september, i think it was at 20 basis points. and that’s all through the economy. people are feeling those higher rates already. and so that shows that the markets think that our forward guidance is credible. and i think we want to keep it that way. michelle smith. scott horsley. [no response] okay. brian cheung. brian cheung. hi there. brian cheung with yahoo finance. to expand on steve’s question about paul volcker, there was also a great pain that came with that as well—higher interest rates, obviously affecting households and businesses. i’m wondering how you kind of square what might be demand disruption. are you already seeing that? is the idea here to incentivize a lack of spending, to decrease consumption, to perhaps table business investments? is that essentially what’s happening through this hiking cycle? thanks. chair powell. well, so, as i mentioned, you can see places where the demand is substantially in excess of supply. and what you’re seeing as a result of that is prices going up and at unsustainable levels, levels that are not consistent with 2 percent inflation. and so what our tools do is that as we raise interest rates, demand moderates: it moves down. interest rates, you know—businesses will invest a little bit less, consumers will spend a little bit less. that’s how it works. but, ultimately, getting those, getting supply and demand back, you know, back in balance, is what gives us 2 percent inflation, which is what gives the economy a footing where people can lead successful economic lives and not worry about inflation. i mean, so, yes, there may be some pain associated with getting back to that. but, you know, the big pain over time is in not dealing with inflation and allowing it to become entrenched. michelle smith. greg robb.  greg robb. thank you. thank you, chair powell. greg robb from marketwatch. i was wondering if you could take a step back and talk about, in march the dot plot had, you know, looked like steady quarter-point rate hikes, get the funds rate up to 2 percent at the end of the year. now—where it seems like you’re much more aggressive. so could you talk about the thinking that’s behind that? thank you. chair powell. so, look, i think what you’ve seen is—really, i would say, in the middle of last fall—there was a time when our policy stance was still pretty much in sync with what the data were saying. if you remember, there were a couple of weak jobs reports. and inflation—month by month, inflation had come down till september, a few months in a row, stayed low. and then around the end of october, we got three or four really strong readings that just said, no, this is a much stronger economy. and by the way—then, with the restatement of the jobs numbers, it looked like the job market was much more even and stronger in the second half of the year. but that hadn’t happened yet. anyway, we got an eci reading—employment compensation, [employment cost] index reading—the friday before the november meeting. then we got a really strong jobs report. then we got a really high cpi report. and so i think it became clear to the committee that we needed to adjust and adapt. and we have. ever since then, really ever since then, we’ve been adapting. we, you know—the committee moved by the time of the december meeting to a median [in participants’ 2022 projections] of three rate increases, then to a median of seven increases at the march meeting. and that process is going on. and it’s clearly continuing. and that’s why i say—and i actually mentioned this at the march meeting—that no one should look at any single sep as sort of a real resting place for 90 days, because we’re in a fast-evolving situation. and that’s what’s happened. you can see— unanimous vote today, of course. and i told you the guidance—that broad support on the  committee to have 50-basis-point hikes on the table at the next couple of meetings. so you’re right. and by the way, other forecasters have been doing the same thing. and it’s just us adapting to the data and to the situation and using our tools to deal with it. michelle smith. thanks. we’ll go to nancy for the last question. nancy marshall-genzer. hi. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. chair powell, i want to ask how you’re able to balance your dual mandate—stable prices and maximum employment—especially when the unemployment rate for black workers is still roughly double, roughly twice the rate for white workers. chair powell. so unemployment rates for all racial groups have come down a lot and are now much closer to where they were before the pandemic hit. so that’s one thing i would say. and that’s important. but the bigger point is this: i do not, at this time, see the two sides of the mandate as in tension. i don’t, because you can see that the labor market is out of balance. you can see that there’s a labor shortage. there aren’t enough people to fill these job openings. and companies can’t hire, and wages are moving up at levels that would not, over time, be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. and, of course, everyone loves to see wages go up. and it’s a great thing, but you want them to go up at a sustainable level, because these wages are, to some extent, being eaten up by inflation. so, what that really means is, to get the kind of labor market we really want to get, we really want to have a labor market that serves all americans, especially the people in the lower-income part of the distribution, especially them. to do that, you’ve got to have price stability. and we’ve got to get back to price stability so that we can have a labor market where people’s wages aren’t being eaten up by inflation and where we can have a long expansion, too. that’s—the good things you can have, as we have. we’ve had—several of the longest expansions in u.s. history have been in the last 40 years, and that’s  because it’s been a time of low inflation. and long expansions are good for people and good for the labor market. so that’s the way i think about it. i think we—you know, our tools work. we have to think in the, in the medium and longer term. and i do think that the best thing for everyone is for us to get back to price stability to support, really, a sustained period of strong labor market conditions. thanks very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations.  page 2 federal open market committee statistics, board; andrea raffo, associate director, division of international finance, board; jeffrey d. walker,2 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board norman j. morin, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board; zeynep senyuz, deputy associate director, division of monetary affairs, board etienne gagnon and andrew meldrum, assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board penelope a. beattie, 3 section chief, office of the secretary, board; valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board; logan t. lewis, 4 section chief, division of international finance, board randall a. williams, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board isabel cairó, michele cavallo, and manjola tase, principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board jose acosta, senior communications analyst, division of information technology, board david altig, kartik b. athreya, michael dotsey, michelle m. neal, and anna paulson, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of atlanta, richmond, philadelphia, new york, and chicago, respectively marc giannoni, giovanni olivei, and mark l.j. wright, senior vice presidents, federal reserve banks of dallas, boston, and minneapolis, respectively james p. bergin, nicolas petrosky-nadeau, and matthew d. raskin,2 vice presidents, federal reserve banks of new york, san francisco, and new york, respectively 3 attended tuesday’s session only. developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a discussion of monetary policy expectations in the united states. federal reserve communications since the march fomc meeting were perceived as signaling a more rapid removal of policy accommodation than had been expected, resulting in significant shifts in expectations regarding the path of the federal funds rate. for the current meeting, federal funds futures implied around 50 basis points of policy rate tightening, and open market desk survey respondents assigned an average probability of 80 percent to that outcome. the median desk survey respondents also projected 50-basis-point increases in the target range at the two following meetings and another 125 basis points of increases by the middle of next year, bringing the projected midpoint of the target range to a peak of 3.13 percent—substantially higher than in previous surveys. market participants continued to note significant uncertainty regarding the economic outlook and the degree of policy tightening ahead. this uncertainty was reflected in the dispersion in survey respondents’ average probability distribution for the target range at the end of 2023. regarding the outlook for runoff of the federal reserve’s securities holdings, market participants widely expected the committee to announce the commencement of balance sheet runoff at the current meeting. median survey responses suggested that most market participants anticipated maximum redemption caps of $60 billion per month for treasury securities and $35 billion per month for agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs), with the caps phased in over roughly three months. survey responses continued to reflect substantial dispersion in views on the level of system open market account (soma) holdings at which balance sheet runoff would end. the manager turned next to a discussion of u.s. financial market developments. financial conditions tightened notably over the period. treasury yields increased across the curve, with the rise primarily reflecting higher real interest rates. longer-term private borrowing rates also moved higher, with 30-year fixed-rate mortgage rates rising above 5 percent to the highest levels in over a decade. equity indexes ended the period substantially lower, on net. these indexes moved up earlier in the period in connection with a perceived reduction in tail risks stemming from the war in ukraine but then moved lower, reportedly because of increased caution regarding attended the discussion of economic developments and outlook. 4  minutes of the meeting of may 3–4, 2022 page 3 the economic outlook amid the expected tightening in u.s. monetary policy. the dollar appreciated, leaving the broad trade-weighted dollar up around 2 percent over the period. viewed over a longer time horizon, financial conditions, as measured by many financial conditions indexes, had tightened by historically large amounts since the beginning of the year. market- and survey-based measures of u.s. inflation expectations continued to project a significant deceleration in inflation in the coming years. nonetheless, far-forward inflation compensation rose over the period, and market participants remained attentive to the risk that, in bringing inflation back to 2 percent, the committee would need to tighten by more than currently expected. in global financial developments, many advanced-economy central banks raised policy rates over the period, and investors increasingly came to anticipate tighter monetary policy ahead in most advanced foreign economies. the bank of japan was an exception and was widely anticipated to maintain its accommodative policies. the yen depreciated 9 percent against the dollar over the intermeeting period to its weakest level in over two decades. emerging market (em) currencies remained relatively resilient. market participants focused on the spread of covid-19 in china and the effect of zero-covid policies, which had resulted in increasingly widespread lockdowns. the renminbi depreciated against the dollar around 4 percent over the intermeeting period. the manager turned next to a discussion of developments in money markets. the effective federal funds rate rose 25 basis points following the increase in the target range at the march fomc meeting and remained stable throughout the period. secured overnight rates also rose by 25 basis points following the march meeting, though modest softness emerged in subsequent days. market participants noted that ongoing uncertainty about the near-term path of federal reserve policy had increased demand for very short-dated investments. this demand, combined with declining treasury bill supply, contributed to the downward pressure on secured rates and to rising overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) usage. the manager expected that on rrp usage could remain elevated in coming months but anticipated that, over the longer term, usage would decline as balance sheet reduction proceeded. the manager indicated that the desk was prepared to implement the committee’s plan for balance sheet reduction and that, in the event that the committee announced the plan at the end of the current meeting, the desk would issue a statement and faqs providing the public with details regarding the implementation of the plan. the desk would closely monitor market conditions and update the committee during the runoff process. the deputy soma manager reviewed developments concerning desk operations. the desk planned to increase the publication frequency of data on on rrp usage. this additional information would provide the public with greater transparency about usage of the on rrp facility. the desk planned to publish the soma annual report soon. in addition to the detailed review of open market operations over 2021, the report would include updated illustrative projections of the size and composition of the federal reserve’s balance sheet over coming years. with respect to other operational matters, the desk continued to work on details of plans for agency mbs cusip (committee on uniform security identification procedures) aggregation and anticipated that this process would begin in coming months. finally, the deputy manager requested that the committee vote to maintain the standing u.s. dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements and to renew the reciprocal currency arrangements with canada and mexico under the north american framework agreement. in their discussion, participants widely agreed that the standing swap lines are a critical tool allowing the federal reserve to address global dollar funding pressures that could otherwise adversely affect the u.s. economy. the committee voted unanimously to renew the reciprocal currency arrangements with the bank of canada and the bank of mexico; these arrangements are associated with the federal reserve’s participation in the north american framework agreement of 1994. in addition, the committee voted unanimously to renew the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the bank of canada, the bank of england, the bank of japan, the european central bank, and the swiss national bank. the votes to renew the federal reserve’s participation in these standing arrangements occur annually at the april or may fomc meeting. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the may 3–4 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product  page 4 federal open market committee (gdp) declined in the first quarter. however, first-quarter growth in private domestic final demand was faster than in the previous quarter, while labor market conditions tightened further in march. consumer price inflation through march—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—remained elevated. goods, capital goods, and automotive products. by contrast, real exports of goods fell back after rising briskly late last year, with broad-based declines in most major categories. both real exports and imports of services grew at a moderate pace in the first quarter, though both were held back by a tepid recovery in international travel amid ongoing waves of covid-19. total nonfarm payroll employment rose in march, and the unemployment rate declined to 3.6 percent. the unemployment rates for african americans and for hispanics moved lower, though both rates remained noticeably higher than the national average. the labor force participation rate increased in march, as did the employment-to-population ratio. the private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, remained elevated. the employment cost index of hourly compensation in the private sector rose 4.8 percent over the 12 months ending in march; this gain was much larger than the corresponding 12-month changes posted in each of the preceding four years and was the largest 12-month increase since 1990. data suggested that foreign economic growth remained solid in the first quarter, as most economies continued to show adaptability to new covid-19 waves. chinese data for march and april, however, showed declines in manufacturing and services activity and worsening supply bottlenecks after chinese authorities locked down shanghai and other cities to combat the spread of the omicron variant. the ongoing russian invasion of ukraine also left its imprint on foreign economies, with consumer and business sentiment declining in europe and global prices of a range of commodities continuing to rise. foreign inflation increased significantly further, driven by surging energy and food prices as well as some broadening of price pressures to core goods and services. in response, many central banks around the world tightened their monetary policy stances. consumer prices continued to rise rapidly. total pce price inflation was 6.6 percent over the 12 months ending in march, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 5.2 percent over the same period. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 3.7 percent in march, 2 percentage points higher than its year-earlier rate of increase. a new version of the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, moved up in the first quarter and was at the upper end of the range of values seen since 2005. both real pce and residential investment increased in the first quarter at rates similar to those seen in the fourth quarter of 2021. business fixed investment growth picked up sharply in the first quarter, with spending on equipment and intellectual property products posting a large increase. inventory investment moved lower after surging in the fourth quarter of 2021, and total real government purchases declined further, led by a drop in defense purchases. the u.s. international trade deficit widened further in the first quarter of this year, and net exports made a large negative contribution to real u.s. gdp growth. goods imports continued the fourth quarter’s strong growth, driven by large increases in real imports of consumer staff review of the financial situation u.s. treasury yields and the market-implied federal funds rate path moved substantially higher over the intermeeting period as federal reserve communications and domestic economic data releases were perceived as suggesting that a more aggressive tightening of monetary policy was likely over coming months. sovereign yields in advanced foreign economies (afes) also increased notably. broad domestic equity price indexes declined on net, and the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500 index—the vix—remained elevated. short-term funding markets were stable, while participation in the on rrp facility increased further. amid the increase in treasury yields, borrowing costs increased in many sectors and were at or somewhat above pre-pandemic levels. since the march fomc meeting, 2-, 5-, and 10-year treasury yields increased significantly on net. the increases in nominal treasury yields were primarily accounted for by rising real yields, while inflation compensation implied by treasury inflation-protected securities was little changed. alongside moves in shorter-term treasury yields, the expected federal funds rate path— implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes—rose notably since the march fomc meeting.  minutes of the meeting of may 3–4, 2022 page 5 broad equity indexes decreased over the intermeeting period. early in the period, equity prices increased, supported by the robust pace of economic activity and reduced market concerns about the implications for the global economy of russia’s invasion of ukraine. the initial sharp gains in stock prices were followed by larger declines later in the period, as longer-term interest rates rose substantially and as some disappointing earnings reports toward the end of the intermeeting period weighed on equity prices. the vix declined substantially early in the period but ended the period little changed on net, remaining at elevated levels. similarly, spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed moderately earlier in the intermeeting period and then widened, ending the period only slightly narrower, on net, and below the median of their historical distribution. spreads on municipal bonds were up modestly and stood at about the 90th percentile of their historical distribution. conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period, with the march increase in the federal reserve’s administered rates passing through to overnight money market rates. secured overnight rates softened later in the period, with downward pressure on rates attributed to continuing declines in net treasury bill issuance, increased activity in certain segments of the repo market that tend to trade at lower rates, and money market funds continuing to shorten portfolio maturities amid uncertainty about the pace of anticipated policy rate increases. consistent with the downward pressure on repo rates, daily take-up in the on rrp facility remained elevated. spreads on most types of longer-tenor commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposit narrowed, reportedly reflecting reduced market concerns about the effects of russia’s invasion of ukraine, although some of the spreads remained slightly wider than those seen earlier this year. over the intermeeting period, sovereign yields in afes increased notably because of concerns about further inflationary pressures, some central bank communications that were perceived as less accommodative than expected, and spillovers from rises in u.s. treasury yields. prospects of tighter monetary policy and covid-related lockdowns in china weighed on prices of risky assets, but investor concerns surrounding the economic effects of the war in ukraine seemed to abate partially. on balance, major foreign equity indexes registered mixed and relatively modest changes. the u.s. dollar generally strengthened, with a more pronounced dollar appreciation against afe currencies, as u.s. treasury yields generally rose more than their afe counterparts. among em currencies, the dollar appreciated significantly against the chinese renminbi. over the intermeeting period, along with the increase in treasury yields, borrowing costs increased in many sectors and were at or somewhat above pre-pandemic levels. credit remained widely available, and borrower credit quality continued to be strong overall. borrowing costs for residential mortgage loans increased substantially, with the 30-year mortgage offer rates reaching levels not seen since 2010. this increase largely reflected the rise in the 10-year treasury yield. corporate bond yields also increased, although the effect of the increase in treasury yields was partly offset by narrower spreads. municipal bond yields also increased notably. bank loan rates for commercial borrowers increased and rates on large syndicated loans were roughly in line with pre-pandemic levels. in consumer credit markets, rates on auto loans and new credit card offers continued to trend upward. credit, which remained widely available for most types of borrowers, was broadly in line with pre-pandemic levels. gross nonfinancial corporate bond issuance rebounded sharply in march, mostly reflecting an increase in investment-grade issuance, while gross institutional leveraged loan issuance slowed amid elevated geopolitical uncertainty. commercial and industrial (c&i) loans and commercial real estate (cre) loans on bank balance sheets also grew robustly in march. respondents in the april senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos) reported a continued easing of lending terms and strengthening demand for c&i loans as well as easing standards for multifamily cre loans. for most small businesses, credit appeared to be available, although these businesses’ demand for credit reportedly remained weak. in the april sloos, large banks reported unchanged standards on c&i loans to small firms, while small banks tightened standards modestly to such firms. in consumer credit markets, credit card balances grew strongly in the first quarter amid easing standards and greater utilization, and auto credit outstanding continued to grow steadily through february despite vehicle production shortfalls and low vehicle inventories. residential mortgage credit conditions remained accommoda-  page 6 federal open market committee tive through march, despite the increase in mortgage interest rates, particularly for stronger borrowers who met standard loan criteria. the credit quality of firms, municipalities, and households remained strong overall. the volume of credit rating upgrades for corporate bonds outpaced downgrades moderately in march, continuing a nearly yearlong pattern. the credit quality of c&i loans on banks’ books continued to be strong as delinquency and default rates both remained low. delinquency rates on bank and nonbank loans to small businesses edged down in february, while in the cre sector, borrower financial health continued to recover. household credit quality remained strong, and delinquency rates across both prime and nonprime borrowers continued to be subdued by historical standards. the staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system. the staff judged that, amid a substantial upward shift in interest rates, russia’s invasion of ukraine, and ongoing disruptions to supply chains, the financial system—outside of commodities markets—had been resilient. however, larger or prolonged disruptions in commodities markets could interfere with other markets and real activity more broadly. to date, however, such potential spillovers appeared to be limited. the staff noted that increased uncertainty and ongoing volatility had reduced risk appetite in financial markets and eased price pressures, although valuations of many assets remained elevated. cre valuations appeared somewhat elevated except for sectors that were affected most by the pandemic. residential house prices had risen rapidly, although the staff continued to see key differences from the previous debt-fueled housing boom: the mortgage finance reforms enacted after 2008 limited the potential for significant deterioration in underwriting standards, most new mortgage debt had been added by borrowers with prime credit scores, and homeowners’ equity positions were healthy. the staff assessed that aggregate household and business leverage was moderate. households’ debt-to-gdp ratio remained relatively low, and there were few signs of increased stress among lower-income households. business debt remained elevated relative to its pre-pandemic history, but interest coverage ratios were high. the staff assessed that vulnerabilities arising from financial leverage remained moderate on balance. despite market volatility, the banking sector continued to be well capitalized with strong liquidity. the staff noted that leverage at key nonbank financial institutions (nbfis) was elevated and that bank lending to nbfis continued to increase notably. relatedly, nbfis’ reliance on bank credit lines to meet unexpected liquidity needs could generate moderate liquidity pressures at large banks during times of financial stress. with regard to funding risk, the staff highlighted structural vulnerabilities in some types of mutual funds as a continuing focus. staff economic outlook the projection for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the may fomc meeting implied a trajectory for real gdp that was broadly similar to the march projection. the staff noted that the first-quarter decline in real gdp was driven by categories of spending that had often been volatile in the past, and they viewed the continued strength in private domestic final demand, the labor market, and industrial production as providing a more accurate picture of the economy’s direction in the first quarter. the staff therefore anticipated that gdp growth would rebound in the second quarter and advance at a solid pace over the remainder of the year. gdp growth was then expected to slow in 2023 and 2024 as monetary policy became less accommodative and financial conditions tightened further; by 2024, real gdp growth was expected to be in line with potential output growth. however, the level of real gdp was expected to remain well above potential over the projection period, and labor market conditions were expected to remain very tight. the staff’s projection for pce price inflation was revised up slightly in the second half of 2022 and in 2023 in response to the slow resolution of supply constraints seen over the first part of 2022, a higher projected path for import prices, and a judgment that wage increases would put more upward pressure on services prices than previously assumed. all told, total pce price inflation was expected to be 4.3 percent in 2022. pce price inflation was then expected to step down to 2.5 percent in 2023 and to 2.1 percent in 2024 as supply–demand imbalances in the economy were reduced by slowing aggregate demand and an anticipated easing of supply constraints. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks to the inflation projection were skewed to the upside. the war in ukraine was seen as a possible source of even greater upward pressure on energy and commodity prices, while the war and adverse developments associated with rising covid infections in china were both perceived as increasing the risk that supply  minutes of the meeting of may 3–4, 2022 page 7 chain disruptions and production constraints would be further exacerbated in the united states and abroad. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that, although overall economic activity had edged down in the first quarter, household spending and business fixed investment had remained strong. job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. inflation remained elevated, reflecting continued supply and demand imbalances, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. participants recognized that the invasion of ukraine by russia was causing tremendous human and economic hardship for the ukrainian people. participants judged that the implications for the u.s. economy were highly uncertain. the invasion and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were likely to weigh on economic activity. in addition, participants judged that covid-related lockdowns in china were likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. against this background, participants stated that they were highly attentive to inflation risks. participants commented that after its rapid growth in the last quarter of 2021, real gdp had declined in the first quarter of this year, with net exports and inventory investment making large negative contributions to growth. they noted, however, that these volatile components tended to contain little signal about subsequent growth and that household spending and business fixed investment had remained strong in the first quarter. these advances and the further tightening of labor market conditions were judged consistent with significant underlying momentum in the domestic economy. in line with this judgment, participants expected that real gdp would grow solidly in the current quarter. in their discussion of the economic outlook beyond the near term, participants indicated that they expected that output would expand more moderately this year than in 2021, with growth this year likely near or above its longer-run rate, and that the imbalance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply would diminish over time. participants saw an appropriate firming of monetary policy as playing a central role in addressing this imbalance and in supporting the federal reserve’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. an easing of supply bottlenecks, a further rise in labor force participation, and the waning effects of pandemic-related fiscal policy support were cited as additional factors that could help reduce the supply–demand imbalances in the economy and lower inflation over the medium term. that said, the timing and magnitude of these effects were uncertain. participants recognized the need to adjust the stance of policy depending on how these and other factors played out over time. in their discussion of the household sector, participants indicated that they expected robust growth in consumption spending. they pointed to several elements supporting this outlook, including strong household balance sheets, wide availability of jobs, and the u.s. economy’s resilience in the face of new waves of the virus. the considerable increases in treasury yields across maturities over the intermeeting period were associated with rising interest rates faced by households, particularly rates on home mortgages. a couple of participants reported that their business contacts continued to see robust housing demand and elevated home prices despite higher mortgage interest rates. with respect to the business sector, participants cited robust consumer demand, healthy household balance sheets, and inventory rebuilding as factors supportive of business activity and investment. the ability of firms to meet demand continued to be limited by labor shortages and supply chain bottlenecks. although some participants noted that their business contacts had reported an easing of supply constraints, participants assessed that supply constraints overall were still significant and would likely take some time to be resolved. in addition, the invasion of ukraine by russia and covid-related lockdowns in china were seen as likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. a few participants indicated that some of their business contacts were reportedly hesitant to expand capacity or had postponed construction projects. participants commented that demand for labor continued to outstrip available supply across many parts of the economy and that their business contacts continued to report difficulties in hiring and retaining workers. they observed that various indicators pointed to a very tight labor market. employment growth had continued at a strong pace, the unemployment rate had fallen to a near50-year low, quits and job openings had remained extremely elevated, and nominal wages had continued to rise rapidly. a few participants noted that there were signs that the pandemic-related factors that had held back labor supply might be abating further, especially in the case of prime-age workers. in addition, a few other participants suggested that the unwelcome erosion of real incomes due to high inflation may have contributed to the increase in labor supply. many participants indicated that they expected the labor market to remain tight  page 8 federal open market committee and wage pressures to stay elevated for some time. several participants raised the possibility that, in light of the exceptionally high ratio of vacancies to job searchers, a moderation in labor demand might serve to reduce vacancies and wage pressures without having significant effects on the unemployment rate. participants observed that inflation continued to run well above the committee’s longer-run goal and that inflation pressures were evident in a broad array of goods and services. various participants remarked on the hardship caused by elevated inflation and heightened inflation uncertainty—including by eroding american families’ real incomes and wealth and by making it more difficult for businesses to make production and investment plans. they also pointed out that high inflation could impede the achievement of maximum employment on a sustained basis. participants noted that developments associated with russia’s invasion of ukraine, including surges in energy and commodity prices, were adding to near-term inflation pressures. in addition, covid-related lockdowns in china were likely to disrupt global supply chains, potentially adding further upward pressure on the prices paid by u.s. businesses and consumers. most participants indicated that their business contacts had continued to report that substantial increases in wages and input prices were being passed through into higher prices to their customers. a few participants added that some of their contacts were starting to report that higher prices were hurting sales. a number of participants observed that recent monthly data might suggest that overall price pressures may no longer be worsening. these participants also emphasized that price pressures remained elevated and that it was too early to be confident that inflation had peaked. many participants commented that measures of shortterm inflation expectations were elevated or that far-forward measures of inflation compensation were near the upper edge of their historical range. several participants judged that measures of longer-term inflation expectations derived from surveys of households, professional forecasters, and market participants still appeared to be broadly consistent with the committee’s longer-run inflation objective, likely reflecting respondents’ confidence that the federal reserve would take the actions necessary to return inflation to 2 percent. they noted that, together with appropriate firming of monetary policy and an eventual easing of supply constraints, wellanchored longer-term inflation expectations would support a return of inflation to levels consistent with the committee’s longer-run goal. in their discussion of risks to the outlook, participants emphasized that they were highly attentive to inflation risks and would continue to monitor closely inflation developments and inflation expectations. they agreed that risks to inflation were skewed to the upside and cited several such risks, including those associated with ongoing supply bottlenecks and rising energy and commodity prices—both of which were exacerbated by the russian invasion of ukraine and covid-related lockdowns in china. also mentioned were the risks associated with nominal wage growth continuing to run above levels consistent with 2 percent inflation over time and the extent to which households’ high savings since the onset of the pandemic and healthy balance sheets would support greater-than-expected underlying momentum in consumer spending and contribute to upside inflation pressures. in addition, some participants emphasized that persistently high inflation heightened the risk that longer-term inflation expectations could become unanchored; in that case, the task of returning inflation to 2 percent would be more difficult. uncertainty about real activity was also seen as elevated. various participants noted downside risks to the outlook, including risks associated with the russian invasion and covidrelated lockdowns in china and the likelihood of a prolonged rise in energy and commodity prices. several participants who commented on issues related to financial stability noted that the tightening of monetary policy could interact with vulnerabilities related to the liquidity of markets for treasury securities and to the private sector’s intermediation capacity. a couple of participants pointed to increased risks in financial markets linked to commodities following russia’s invasion of ukraine, which had led to higher prices and volatility across a wide range of energy, agricultural, and metal products. these participants observed that the trading and risk-management practices of some key participants in commodities markets were not fully visible to regulatory authorities and noted that central counterparties (ccps) needed to remain capable of managing risks associated with heightened volatility or that margin requirements at ccps could give rise to significant liquidity demands for large banks, broker-dealers, and their clients. in their consideration of the appropriate stance of monetary policy, all participants concurred that the u.s. economy was very strong, the labor market was extremely tight, and inflation was very high and well above the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate  minutes of the meeting of may 3–4, 2022 page 9 50 basis points at this meeting. they further anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be warranted to achieve the committee’s objectives. participants also agreed that it was appropriate to start reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet on june 1, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that would be issued in conjunction with the postmeeting statement. participants judged that an appropriate firming of the stance of monetary policy, along with an eventual waning of supply–demand imbalances, would help to keep longer-term inflation expectations anchored and bring inflation down over time to levels consistent with the committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal. all participants reaffirmed their strong commitment and determination to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. to this end, participants agreed that the committee should expeditiously move the stance of monetary policy toward a neutral posture, through both increases in the target range for the federal funds rate and reductions in the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. most participants judged that 50 basis point increases in the target range would likely be appropriate at the next couple of meetings. many participants assessed that the committee’s previous communications had been helpful in shifting market expectations regarding the policy outlook into better alignment with the committee’s assessment and had contributed to the tightening of financial conditions. all participants supported the plans for reducing the size of the balance sheet. this reduction, starting on june 1, would work in parallel with increases in the target range for the policy rate in firming the stance of monetary policy. a number of participants remarked that, after balance sheet runoff was well under way, it would be appropriate for the committee to consider sales of agency mbs to enable suitable progress toward a longer-run soma portfolio composed primarily of treasury securities. any program of sales of agency mbs would be announced well in advance. regarding risks related to the balance sheet reduction, several participants noted the potential for unanticipated effects on financial market conditions. participants agreed that the economic outlook was highly uncertain and that policy decisions should be data dependent and focused on returning inflation to the committee’s 2 percent goal while sustaining strong labor market conditions. at present, participants judged that it was important to move expeditiously to a more neutral monetary policy stance. they also noted that a restrictive stance of policy may well become appropriate depending on the evolving economic outlook and the risks to the outlook. participants observed that developments associated with russia’s invasion of ukraine and the covid-related lockdowns in china posed heightened risks for both the united states and economies around the world. several participants commented on the challenges that monetary policy faced in restoring price stability while also maintaining strong labor market conditions. in light of the high degree of uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook, participants judged that risk-management considerations would be important in deliberations over time regarding the appropriate policy stance. many participants judged that expediting the removal of policy accommodation would leave the committee well positioned later this year to assess the effects of policy firming and the extent to which economic developments warranted policy adjustments. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that, although overall economic activity had edged down in the first quarter, household spending and business fixed investment had remained strong. job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had declined substantially. members also agreed that inflation remained elevated, reflecting continued supply and demand imbalances, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. members concurred that the invasion of ukraine by russia was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. members judged that the implications of the war for the u.s. economy were highly uncertain. members agreed that the invasion and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were likely to weigh on economic activity. members also agreed that covid-related lockdowns in china were likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. in light of continuing inflation risks, members judged that it would be appropriate for the postmeeting statement to note that the committee is highly attentive to the upside risks to inflation. in their assessment of the monetary policy stance necessary for achieving the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals, members agreed that, with appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, they expected inflation to return to the committee’s 2 percent objective and the labor market to remain strong. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate  page 10 federal open market committee to ¾ to 1 percent and anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate. in addition, the committee decided to begin reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities on june 1, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in conjunction with the postmeeting statement. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. they also concurred that their assessments would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. $60 billion per month. the decline in holdings of treasury securities under this monthly cap will include treasury coupon securities and, to the extent that coupon maturities are less than the monthly cap, treasury bills. o • following the monetary policy discussion, which included a consideration of plans for reducing the size of the balance sheet, all participants indicated support for the proposed plans for reducing the size of the balance sheet. the committee voted unanimously to adopt the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, as shown below. plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet (as adopted effective may 4, 2022) consistent with the principles for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in january 2022, all committee participants agreed to the following plans for significantly reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings. • the committee intends to reduce the federal reserve’s securities holdings over time in a predictable manner primarily by adjusting the amounts reinvested of principal payments received from securities held in the system open market account (soma). beginning on june 1, principal payments from securities held in the soma will be reinvested to the extent that they exceed monthly caps. o for treasury securities, the cap will initially be set at $30 billion per month and after three months will increase to • for agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities, the cap will initially be set at $17.5 billion per month and after three months will increase to $35 billion per month. over time, the committee intends to maintain securities holdings in amounts needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively in its ample reserves regime. o to ensure a smooth transition, the committee intends to slow and then stop the decline in the size of the balance sheet when reserve balances are somewhat above the level it judges to be consistent with ample reserves. o once balance sheet runoff has ceased, reserve balances will likely continue to decline for a time, reflecting growth in other federal reserve liabilities, until the committee judges that reserve balances are at an ample level. o thereafter, the committee will manage securities holdings as needed to maintain ample reserves over time. the committee is prepared to adjust any of the details of its approach to reducing the size of the balance sheet in light of economic and financial developments. after adopting the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective may 5, 2022, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of ¾ to 1 percent. • conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of  minutes of the meeting of may 3–4, 2022 page 11 1.0 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 0.8 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in the calendar month of june that exceeds a monthly cap of $30 billion. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in the calendar month of june that exceeds a monthly cap of $17.5 billion. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “although overall economic activity edged down in the first quarter, household spending and business fixed investment remained strong. job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined substantially. inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. the invasion of ukraine by russia is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. the implications for the u.s. economy are highly uncertain. the invasion and related events are creating additional upward pressure on inflation and are likely to weigh on economic activity. in addition, covid-related lockdowns in china are likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. the committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. with appropriate firming in the stance of monetary policy, the committee expects inflation to return to its 2 percent objective and the labor market to remain strong. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to ¾ to 1 percent and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. in addition, the committee decided to begin reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities on june 1, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in conjunction with this statement. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, james bullard, esther l. george, patrick harker, loretta j. mester, and christopher j. waller. patrick harker voted as an alternate member at this meeting. to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 0.90 percent, effective may 5, 2022. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously  page 12 federal open market committee to approve a ½ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 1 percent, effective may 5, 2022. 5 it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, june 14–15, 2022. the meeting adjourned at 10:15 a.m. on may 4, 2022. notation vote by notation vote completed on april 5, 2022, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on march 15–16, 2022.  james a. clouse secretary 5 in taking this action, the board approved requests to establish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the fed- eral reserve banks of boston, new york, philadelphia, cleveland, richmond, atlanta, chicago, st. louis, minneapolis, kansas city, dallas, and san francisco. 
une 15, 2022 chair powell. good afternoon. i will begin with one overarching message: we at the fed understand the hardship that high inflation is causing. we are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down, and we’re moving expeditiously to do so. we have both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price stability on behalf of american families and businesses. the economy and the country have been through a lot over the past two and a half years and have proved resilient. it is essential that we bring inflation down if we are to have a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. from the standpoint of our congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the current picture is plain to see: the labor market is extremely tight, and inflation is much too high. against this backdrop, today the federal open market committee raised its policy interest rate by ¾ percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in that rate will be appropriate. in addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. i’ll have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. overall economic activity edged down in the first quarter, as unusually sharp swings in inventories and net exports more than offset continued strong underlying demand. recent indicators suggest that real gdp growth has picked up this quarter, with consumption spending remaining strong. in contrast, growth in business fixed investment appears to be slowing, and activity in the housing sector looks to be softening, in part reflecting higher mortgage rates. the tightening in financial conditions that we’ve seen in recent months should continue to temper growth and help bring demand into better balance with supply. as shown in our summary of  economic projections, fomc participants have marked down their projections for economic activity, with the median projection for real gdp growth running below 2 percent through 2024. the labor market has remained extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50-year low, job vacancies at historical highs, and wage growth elevated. over the past three months, employment rose by an average of 408,000 jobs per month, down from the average pace seen earlier in the year but still robust. improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for african americans and hispanics. labor demand is very strong, while labor supply remains subdued, with the labor force participation rate little changed since january. fomc participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance, easing the upward pressures on wages and prices. the median projection in the sep for the unemployment rate rises somewhat over the next few years, moving from 3.7 percent at the end of this year to 4.1 percent in 2024, levels that are noticeably above the march projections. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. over the 12 months ending in april, total pce prices rose 6.3 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core prices rose 4.9 percent. in may, the 12-month change in the consumer price index came in above expectations at 8.6 percent, and the change in the core cpi was 6 percent. aggregate demand is strong, supply constraints have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, and price pressures have spread to a broad range of goods and services. the surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from russia’s invasion of ukraine is boosting prices for gasoline and food and is creating additional upward pressure on inflation. and covid-related lockdowns in china are likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. fomc participants have revised up their projections for inflation this year, particularly for total  pce inflation given developments in food and energy prices. the median projection is 5.2 percent this year and falls to 2.6 percent next year and 2.2 percent in 2024. participants continue to see risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. against the backdrop of the rapidly evolving economic environment, our policy has been adapting, and it will continue to do so. at today’s meeting, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¾ percentage point, resulting in a 1½ percentage point increase in the target range so far this year. the committee reiterated that it anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. and we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet—which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. coming out of our last meeting in may, there was a broad sense on the committee that a ½ percentage point increase in the target range should be considered at this meeting if economic and financial conditions evolved in line with expectations. we also stated that we were highly attentive to inflation risks and that we would be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. since then, inflation has again surprised to the upside, some indicators of inflation expectations have risen, and projections for inflation this year have been revised up notably. in response to these developments, the committee decided that a larger increase in the  target range was warranted at today’s meeting. this continues our approach of expeditiously moving our policy rate up to more normal levels. and it will help ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at 2 percent. as shown in the sep, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 3.4 percent at the end of this year, 1.5 percentage points higher than projected in march and 0.9 percentage point above the median estimate of its longer-run value. the median projection rises further to 3.8 percent at the end of next year and declines to 3.4 percent in 2024, still above the median longer-run value. of course, these projections do not represent a committee plan or decision, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. over coming months, we will be looking for compelling evidence that inflation is moving down, consistent with inflation returning to 2 percent. we anticipate that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate; the pace of those changes will continue to depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. clearly, today’s 75 basis point increase is an unusually large one, and i do not expect moves of this size to be common. from the perspective of today, either a 50 basis point or a 75 basis point increase seems most likely at our next meeting. we will, however, make our decisions meeting by meeting, and we will continue to communicate our thinking as clearly as we can. our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. making appropriate monetary policy in this uncertain environment requires a recognition that the economy often evolves in unexpected ways. inflation has obviously surprised to the upside over the past year, and further surprises could be in store. we therefore will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. and we will strive to avoid  adding uncertainty in what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain time. we are highly attentive to inflation risks and determined to take the measures necessary to restore price stability. the american economy is very strong and well positioned to handle tighter monetary policy. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you. and i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. thank you. howard schneider with reuters. two related questions. chair powell, do you feel you boxed yourself in with the language you used at the last press conference on 50 basis point hikes in june and july? and would you please give us as detailed a sense as you can of what role you played in reshaping market expectations so quickly on monday? chair powell. so, as you know, we always aim to provide as much clarity as we can about our policy intentions subject to the inherent uncertainty in the economic outlook, because we think monetary policy is more effective when market participants understand how policy will evolve, when they understand our objective function, our reaction function. and in the current highly unusual circumstances with inflation well above our goal, we think it’s helpful to provide even more clarity than usual—again, subject to uncertainty in the outlook. and i think over the course of this year, financial markets have responded and have, generally, shown that they understand the path we’re laying out. of course, it remains data dependent.  and so that’s what we generally think about guidance, and that’s why we offer it. and, of course, when we offered that—when i offered that guidance at the last meeting, i did say that it was subject to the economy performing about in line with expectations. i also said that if the economy performed—if data came in worse than expected, then we would consider moving even more aggressively. so we got the cpi data and also some data on inflation expectations late last week, and we thought for a while, and we thought, well, this is the appropriate thing to do. so then the question is, what do you do? and do you wait six weeks to do it at the next meeting? and i think the answer is, that’s not where we are with this. so we decided we needed to go ahead, and so we did. and that’s really—that’s really how we made the decision. michelle smith. okay. jeanna. jeanna smialek. thanks for taking our questions. jeanna smialek with the new york times. you—i guess i wonder if you could describe for us a little bit how you’re deciding how aggressive you need to be. so, obviously, 75 today. what did 75 achieve that 50 wouldn’t have, and why not just go for a full percentage point at some point? chair powell. sure. so if you take a step back, what we’re looking for is compelling evidence that inflationary pressures are abating and that inflation is moving back down. and we’d like to see that in the form of a series of declining monthly inflation readings— that’s what we’re looking for. and, by this point, we had actually been expecting to see clear signs of at least inflation flattening out and, ideally, beginning to decline. we’ve said that we’d be data dependent, focused on incoming data, highly attentive to inflation risks—the things that i mentioned to howard moments ago. so contrary to expectations, inflation again surprised to the upside. indicators—some indicators of inflation expectations have risen, and projections of [inflation] this year have  moved up notably. so we thought that strong action was warranted at this meeting, and today we delivered that in the form of a 75 basis point rate hike, as i mentioned. so the point of it, really, is this: we’ve been moving rates up expeditiously to more normal levels, and over the course of the seven months since we pivoted and began moving in this direction, we’ve seen financial conditions tighten, and appropriately so. but the federal funds rate, even after this move, is at 1.6 percent. so, again, the committee is moving rates up expeditiously to more normal levels, and we came to the view that we’d like to do a little more front-end loading on that. so i think that the sep gives you the levels that people think are appropriate at given points in time. this was really about the speed in which we would get there. so, as i mentioned, 75 basis points today—i said the next meeting could well be about a decision between 50 and 75. that would put us, at the end of the july meeting, in that range—in that more normal range, and that’s a desirable place to be, because you begin to have more optionality there about the speed with which you would proceed going forward. just talking about the sep for a second: what it really says is that committee participants widely would like to see policy at a modestly restricted—restrictive level at the end of this year. and that’s six months from now, and so much data [can accrue] and so much can happen, so remember how highly uncertain this is. but so that is generally a range of 3 to 3½ percent. that’s where people are, and that’s what they want to see, knowing what they know now and understanding that we need to be—we need to show resolve but also be flexible [in responding] to incoming data as we see it. if things are better, we don’t need to do that much, and if they’re not, then we either do that much or possibly even more. but in any case, it will be very data dependent. then you’re looking at next year, and what you’re seeing is, people see more—a bit more tightening and a range of maybe 3½ to 4 percent. and that’s generally what  people see as the appropriate path for getting inflation under control and starting back down and getting back down to 2 percent. so 75 basis points seemed like the right thing to do at this meeting, and that’s what we did. michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. steve liesman, cnbc. thank you for taking my question, mr. chairman. you have not used the phrase in a long time “monetary policy is in a good place,” which is a phrase that you used to use often. now that the committee is projecting 4 percent on a—or 3.8 percent next year in terms of the funds rate, which is similar to where the market is now, the futures market of 4 percent funds rate next year, do you think that’s a level that is going to be sufficiently high enough to deal with and bring down the inflation problem? and just as a follow-up, could you break that apart for me? how much of that is restrictive, and how much of that is a normal positive rate that ought to be embedded or not, in your opinion, in the funds rate? thank you. chair powell. sure. so the question really is, how high does the rate really need to go? and this is—the estimates on the committee are in that range of 3½ to 4 percent. and how do you think about that? well, you can think about the longer-run neutral rate, you can compare it to that, and we think that’s in the mid-2s. you can look, frankly, at broader financial conditions. you can look at asset prices, you can look at the effect they’re having on the economy, rates, asset prices, credit spreads—all of those things go into that. you can also look at the yield curve and ask, all along the yield curve, where is the policy rate? so for much of the yield curve now, real rates are positive. that’s not true at the short end. at the short end of the yield curve in the early years, you don’t have real—you have negative rates still.  so that really is one data point—it’s one part of financial conditions. so i think—i have to look at it this way: we move the policy rate. that affects financial conditions. and that affects the economy. we have, of course, ways—rigorous ways to think about it, but, ultimately, it comes down to, do we think financial conditions are in a place where they’re having the desired effect on the economy? and that desired affect is, we’d like to see demand moderating. demand is very hot still in the economy. we’d like to see the labor market getting better in balance between supply and demand, and that can happen [as a result of developments coming] both from supply and demand. right now, there’s—demand is substantially higher than available supply, though, so we feel that there’s a role for us in moderating demand. those are the things we can affect with our policy tools. there are many things we can’t affect, and those would be, you know, the things—the commodity price issues that we’re having around the world due to the war in ukraine and the fallout from that, and also just all of the supply-side things that are still pushing upward on inflation. so that’s really how i think—how i think about it. steve liesman. but does 3.8 percent, 4 percent get it done? does it get the job done on breaking the back of inflation? chair powell. i think it’s certainly in the range of plausible numbers. i think we’ll know when we get there really. i mean, honestly, though, that would be—you would have positive real rates, i think, and inflation coming down by then. i think you’d have positive real rates across the [yield] curve. i think that the neutral rate is pretty low these days. so i would think it would, but you know what? we’re going to find that out empirically. we’re not going to be completely model driven about this. we’re going to be looking at this, keeping our eyes open, and reacting to incoming data both on financial conditions and on what’s happening in the economy.  michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. thanks. nick timiraos. chair powell, you’ve said that you like your policy to work through expectations. and now, obviously, this decision was something quite different from how you and almost all of your colleagues had set those expectations during the intermeeting period. and i know you just said that what changed was really the inflation data—the inflation expectations data. but i’m wondering, on the inflation expectations data, was there something you saw that was unsettling enough to risk eroding the credibility of your verbal guidance by doing something so different from what you had “socialized” before? chair powell. so if you look at a broad range of inflation expectations—so you’ve got the public, you’ve got surveys of the public and of experts, and you’ve also got market based. and i think if you look across that broad range of data, what you see is that expectations are still in the place, very much in the place, where short-term inflation is going to be high but comes down sharply over the next couple of years. and that’s really where inflation expectations are. and also, as you get away from this episode, they get back down close to 2 percent. and so this is really very important to us—that that remain the case. and i think if you look for most measures, most of the time, that’s what you see. if we even see a couple of indicators that bring that into question, we take that very seriously. we do not take this for granted—we take it very seriously. so the preliminary michigan [survey] reading—it’s a preliminary reading; it might be revised—nonetheless, it was quite eye-catching, and we noticed that. we also noticed that the index of common inflation expectations at the board has moved up after being pretty flat for a long time, so we’re watching that, and we’re thinking, “this is something we need to take seriously.” and that is one of the factors, as i mentioned—one of the factors in our deciding to move ahead with 75 basis points today was what we saw in inflation expectations. we’re  absolutely determined to keep them anchored at 2 percent. that was one of the reasons—the other was just the cpi reading. nick timiraos. so if you saw a movement like that again, another tick-up in inflation expectations, would that put a 75 or even 100 basis point increase in play at your next meeting? chair powell. we’re going to—i’ll just say, we’re going to react to the incoming data and appropriately, i think. so i wouldn’t want to put a number on what that might be. the main thing is to get rates up, and then pretty soon, we’ll be in an area where we’re—i think as you get closer to the end of the year, you’re in a range where you’ve got restrictive policy, which is appropriate. forty-year highs in inflation—we think that policy is going to need to be restrictive, and we don’t know how restrictive. so i think that’s how we’ll take it. michelle smith. neil. neil irwin. hi, chair powell. neil irwin from axios. thanks for taking our questions. the late-breaking kind of decision to go to 75 basis points—do you worry that that will make policy guidance a less effective tool in the future? and should we think of that as a kind of symmetrical reaction function if we start to get soft readings on inflation or if the labor market starts to roll over? chair powell. to take your second question first, yes. i mean, i think we’re— again, we’re going, we’re resolved to take this on, but we’re going to be flexible in the implementation of it. sorry—and your [first] question was [about] guidance. so, again, the overall exercise is that we try to be—provide as much clarity about our policy intentions as we can, because we think that makes monetary policy work better. there’s always a tradeoff, because you have to live with that guidance, and so you do it, and it helps a lot of the time. i,  frankly, think this year has been a demonstration of how well it can work. with us having really just done very little in the way of raising interest rates, financial conditions have tightened quite significantly through the expectations channel, as we’ve made it clear what our plans are. so i think that’s been a very healthy thing to be happening. and i would hope that our—it’s always going to be—any guidance that we give is always going to be subject to things working out about as we expect. and, in this particular situation, you know, we’re looking for something specific, and that is progress on inflation. we want to see progress. we want to see—inflation can’t go down until it flattens out, and that’s what we’re looking to see. and if we don’t see that, then that’s the kind of thing that will—even if we don’t see progress for a longer period, that could cause us to react. but we will. soon enough, we will be seeing some progress at some point. and we’ll react [as] appropriate to that, too. but i would like to think, though, that our guidance is still credible, but it’s always going to be conditional on what happens. this is an unusual situation, to get, you know, some data late in, during blackout, pretty close to—very close to our meeting. very unusual to [have] one that would actually change the outcome. so i’ve only seen—in my 10-years-plus here at the fed, i’ve only seen something like that, even close to that, one or two times. so i don’t think it’s something that’ll come up a great deal. michelle smith. colby. colby smith. thank you so much for taking our questions. colby smith with the financial times. on the “clear and convincing” threshold for the inflation trajectory, what is the level of realized inflation that meets that criteria? and how is the committee thinking about the potential tradeoff of much higher unemployment than even in what’s forecasted in the sep if inflation is not moderating at this acceptable pace? chair powell. the second part i didn’t get.  colby smith. what’s the potential tradeoff with higher unemployment than even what’s forecasted in the sep if inflation is not moderating at an acceptable pace? chair powell. right. so, what we want to see is a series of declining monthly readings for inflation, and we’d like to see inflation headed down. but, you know—and right now, our policy rate is well below neutral, right? so, soon enough, we’ll have our policy rate— let’s assume the world works out about like the sep says: the policy rate will be up where we think it should be. and then the question would be: do you slow down? does it make you— you’ll be making these judgments about, is it appropriate now to slow down—from 50 to 25, let’s say—or speed up? so that’s the kind of thinking we’ll be doing, and, again, we’re looking—ultimately, we’re not going to declare victory until we see a series of these, really see convincing evidence, compelling evidence, that inflation is coming down. and that’s what i mean by—that’s what it would take for us to say, “okay, we think this job is done.” because we saw—and, frankly, we saw last year—inflation came down over the course of the summer and then turned right around and went back up. so i think we’re going to be careful about declaring victory. but our—again, the implementation of our policy is going to be flexible and sensitive to incoming data. colby smith. are you more concerned now that to bring down inflation, it’s going to require more than just some pain at this point? chair powell. again, i think that—i do think that our objective, and this is what’s reflected in the sep, but our objective, really, is to bring inflation down to 2 percent while the labor market remains strong. i think that what’s becoming more clear is that many factors that we don’t control are going to play a very significant role in deciding whether that’s possible or not. and there i’m thinking, of course, of commodity prices, the war in ukraine, supply chain  [developments], things like that, where we really—the monetary policy stance doesn’t affect those things. but having said that, there is a path for us to get there—it’s not getting easier; it’s getting more challenging because of these external forces—and that path is to move demand down, and you have a lot of surplus demand. take, for example, in the labor market. so you have two job vacancies, essentially, for every person actively seeking a job, and that has led to a real imbalance in wage negotiating. you could get to a place where that ratio was at a more normal level, and you wouldn’t—you would expect to see those wage pressures move back down to a level where people are still getting healthy wage increases, real wage increases, but at a level that’s consistent with 2 percent inflation. so that’s a possibility. and you could say the same thing about some of the product markets where there’s just excess capacity and really where the strong demand has gone into—sorry, where they’re capacity constrained, right? so you have, effectively, what we think of as a vertical supply curve or close to it. so demand comes in, and it’s very strong, and it shows up in higher prices—not higher quantities, not more cars, because they can’t make the cars because they don’t have the semiconductors. so in principle, that could work in reverse. when demand comes down, you could see—and it’s not guaranteed—but you could see prices coming down more than the typical economic relationships that you see in the textbooks would suggest, because of the unusual situation we’re in on the supply side. so there’s a pathway there. it is not going to be easy, and there—again, it’s our objective, but, as i mentioned, it’s going to depend to some extent on factors we don’t control. michelle smith. rachel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. thank you for taking our questions. rachel siegel from the washington post. so the new projections show the unemployment rate ticking up through 2024. is a higher unemployment rate necessary in order to combat inflation? and  what is lost if the unemployment rate has to go up and people lose their jobs in order to control inflation? thank you. chair powell. so you’re right. in the sep, we have unemployment going up to 4 point—the median is 4.1 percent—of course, [there is] a range of actual forecasts. and i would characterize that, if you were to get inflation down to, you know, on its way down to 2 percent and the unemployment rate went up to 4.1 percent, that’s still a historically low level. we hadn’t seen—we hadn’t seen rates, unemployment rates below 4 percent until a couple years ago for—we’d seen it for, like, one year in the last 50. so the idea that—3.6 percent is historically low in the last century. so a 4.1 percent unemployment rate with inflation well on its way to 2 percent—i think that would be—i think that would be a successful outcome. so we’re not looking to have a higher unemployment rate. but i would say that i would certainly look at that as a successful outcome. rachel siegel. would that include people losing their jobs? chair powell. we’re not—again, we’re not, we don’t seek to put people out of work, of course. we never think, “too many people are working, and fewer people need to have jobs.” but we also think that you really cannot have the kind of labor market we want without price stability. and we have to go back and establish price stability so we can have that kind of labor market, and that’s a labor market where workers are getting wage increases—maybe the workers at the lower end of the spectrum are getting the biggest wage increases, as they were before the pandemic—where participation is high, where there’s lots of job opportunities, where it’s just a really—i mean, the labor market we had before the pandemic was—that’s what we want to get back to. and you see disparities between various groups at historic lows. we’d love to get back to that place. but, to get there—it’s not going to happen with the levels of inflation  we have. so we have to restore that, and it really is in service, in the medium and longer term, of the kind of labor market we want and hope to achieve. michelle smith. matt. matthew boesler. hi, chair powell. matthew boesler with bloomberg. so, as you just mentioned, the committee is now projecting a ½ percentage point rise in the unemployment rate and the seps over the next couple of years, and it removed a line from its policy statement about thinking that the labor market can remain strong while it tightens policy. you just mentioned that that is still your objective, though, so i’m wondering if you could explain why that line was removed from the statement—also whether this means the fomc is trying to induce a recession now to bring inflation down. chair powell. not trying to induce a recession now. let’s be clear about that. we’re trying to achieve 2 percent inflation consistent with a strong labor market. that’s what we’re trying to do. so let me talk about that sentence. clearly, it’s our goal to bring about 2 percent inflation while keeping the labor market strong, right? and that’s kind of what the sep says. the sep has inflation getting down to 2, a little above 2 percent in 2024, with unemployment at 4.1 percent. and this is a strong labor market—this is a good labor market. and, as i mentioned, there are pathways to do it. but those pathways have become much more challenging due to factors that are not under our control. again, thinking here of the fallout from the war in ukraine, which has brought a spike in prices of energy, food, fertilizer, industrial chemicals, and also just the supply chains more broadly, which have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated. so the sentence that we deleted said that we believe that appropriate monetary policy, effectively alone, can bring about the result of 2 percent inflation with a strong labor market. and so much of it is really not down to monetary policy. it just didn’t—the  sentence isn’t—it kind of says on its face that monetary policy alone can do this. and that’s not—that just didn’t seem appropriate, so we took the sentence out. matthew boesler. and given the new projections for the unemployment rate, could you talk a little bit about what accounts for such reduced confidence against, say, a month ago or three months ago that inflation will largely normalize on its own as these supply-side issues get worked out? thanks. chair powell. well, yeah, i think you’ve seen—again, we’ve been expecting progress, and we didn’t get that. we got sort of the opposite. so i also think the situation, really—since the consequences of the ukraine war become more and more clear, what you’re seeing is the situation getting more difficult. and you look around the world—i mean, lots of countries are—lots of countries are looking at inflation of 10 percent, and it’s largely due to commodities prices. but all over the world, you’re seeing these effects. and so—and we’re seeing them here: gas prices at all-time highs, and things like that. that’s not something we can do something about. so that is really—and, by the way, headline inflation, headline inflation is important for expectations. people—the public’s expectations, why would they be distinguishing between core inflation and headline inflation? core inflation is something we [on the committee] think about because it is a better predictor of future inflation. but headline inflation is what people experience. they don’t know what core is. why would they? they have no reason to. so that’s—expectations are very much at risk due to high headline inflation. so it’s become—the environment has become more difficult, clearly, in the last four or five months, and hence the need for the policy actions that we took today. hence our resolution to get rates up and, ultimately, get them to where we think they need to be in coming months.  edward lawrence. thanks, chair powell. edward lawrence with fox business. i wanted to ask you—you talked about cpi going to 8.6 percent, that retail sales surprised the market by falling and then revisions to the previous months were down. are you hearing from contacts about consumers slowing spending or changing their habits? chair powell. so we’re, of course, watching very, very carefully for that and looking at the retail—the big store numbers and all that kind of thing. and so i—but i think the fair summary of what we see is, you see continuing shifts in consumption, you see some things getting—sales going down, but overall spending is very strong. the consumer’s in really good shape financially. they’re spending. there’s no sign of a broader slowdown that i can see in the economy. people are talking about it a lot—consumer confidence is very low. that’s probably related to gas prices and also just stock prices to some extent for other people. but that’s what we’re seeing. we’re not seeing a broad slowdown. we see job growth slowing, but it’s still at quite robust levels. we see the economy slowing a bit but still growth levels—healthy growth levels. edward lawrence. so then as you are raising rates in this economy, how closely are you watching consumer spending, or is there something—another indicator that you’re watching more closely? chair powell. it would be hard to watch anything much more closely than we watch consumer spending, but we watch everything. we watch business fixed investment, which actually has softened a bit. and we watch—we’re responsible for watching everything. consumption is 60-some percent of the economy, two-thirds of the economy, so, naturally, we spend a lot of time on that. and, again, there’s a lot going on—there are a lot of flows back and  forth—but, ultimately, it does appear that the u.s. economy is in a strong position and well positioned to deal with higher interest rates. michelle smith. michael mckee. michael mckee. thank you, mr. chairman. michael mckee from bloomberg radio and television. are you targeting headline inflation now or core inflation? in other words, how far would you chase oil prices if they keep going up? if that’s going to be the component that drives expectations, would you risk recession for a headline rate if the core rate is holding steady or starting to go down? chair powell. so the—we’re responsible for inflation in the law. and inflation means headline inflation. so that’s our ultimate goal. we, of course, like all central banks do, look very, very carefully at core inflation because it is—it’s a much better predictor, and it’s much—it’s a much better predictor of where inflation is going, and it’s also more relevant to our tools. as i mentioned, the parts that don’t go into core are mostly outside the scope of our tools, so we look at that. but it’s—the current situation is particularly difficult because of what i mentioned about expectations. we can’t affect, really—i mean, the energy prices are set by global commodity prices. and most of food—not all of it, but most food prices are pretty heavily influenced by global commodity prices, too. also other things. so we can’t really have much of an effect. but we have to be mindful of the potential effect on inflation expectations [coming] from headline [inflation readings]. so it’s a very difficult situation to be in, and we— again, we can’t do much about the difference between [headline and core inflation rates due to] the elements that make up headline that are not in core. michael mckee. could i just, as a follow-up, get a clarification on the sep? when the members gave their forecasts, when were they inserted into the record? were they revised  after the cpi or michigan numbers came out? in other words, does the sep, as we have it now, reflect the same factors that led you to go to a 75 basis point move? chair powell. the sep is of one piece. it reflects all of the economic readings. it also reflects the 75 basis point increase. this is important. so people had that in hand when they—when their seps were submitted. so it’s—in other words, it’s not in addition to what’s in the sep. the sep—everyone’s sep reflects their thinking about this rate increase and what’s going forward. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi, victoria guida from politico. i wanted to ask about how you’re measuring progress, especially since you’ve now started front-loading rate hikes more. you’ve talked about how you want to see inflation coming down over a series of reports, and i guess i’m curious whether you think inflation data itself is a really good indicator or whether you might be concerned that it’s a lagging indicator or that it might send confusing signals given that, as you’ve talked about, there are sort of supply and demand aspects. and i guess my question is, do you think that inflation will tell you—inflation data will tell you when you’ve gone to where you need to go, or do you just feel like maybe it’s better to overshoot than to undershoot? chair powell. so i think the role that we can play—maybe the way to get at this is to say that the role that we can play is around demand, right? and we’ll be able to see—the areas that we can affect are those associated with excess demand, and we’ll be able to see our effect on, for example, job openings in real time. and that would tell us what’s—that would tell us about wages. wages are not principally responsible for the inflation that we’re seeing, but, going forward, they would be very important, particularly in the service sector. sorry, i’m not sure i’m getting to your question.  victoria guida. my question is, is inflation data itself the best indicator for when you’re getting to where you need to go, or might it lead you to go too far? chair powell. there’s always a risk of going too far or going not far enough, and it’s going to be a very difficult judgment to make, or maybe not—maybe it’ll be really clear. but we’re—and we’re quite mindful of the dangers. but i will say, the worst mistake we could make would be to fail, which—it’s not an option. we have to restore price stability. we really do, because everything—it’s the bedrock of the economy. if you don’t have price stability, the economy’s really not going to work the way it’s supposed to. it won’t work for people—their wages will be eaten up. so we want to get the job done. this inflation happened relatively recently. we don’t think that it’s affecting expectations in any kind of fundamental way. we don’t think that we’re seeing a wage–price spiral. we think that the public generally sees us as very likely to be successful in getting inflation down to 2 percent, and that’s critical. it’s absolutely key to the whole thing that we sustain that confidence. so that’s how we’re thinking about it. brian cheung. hi, brian cheung with yahoo finance. i just want to expand, i guess, on what you just said now about the general public feeling like you can get this done. you talk about consumer sentiment being down, also inflation expectations being up, recession just broadly being dinner table talk. does the general feel among american households and also businesses square with your explanation of the economy, given that the description of inflation in the statement didn’t change between may and june? thanks. chair powell. so, clearly, people don’t like inflation—a lot. and many people are experiencing it, really, for the first time, because we haven’t had anything like this kind of inflation in 40 years. and it’s really something people don’t like. and they’re experiencing that,  and that’s showing up in their—in surveys and in all kinds of ways. and we understand that, and we understand the hardship that people are experiencing from high inflation, and we’re determined to do what we can to get inflation back down. so that’s really what we’re saying. we’re not—i’m not—clearly, it’s an incredibly unpopular thing, and it’s very painful for people. i guess what i’m saying is, the question, the really critical question from the perspective of doing our job is making sure that the public does have confidence that we have the tools and will use them and they do work to bring inflation back down over time. it will take some time, we think, to get inflation back down, but we will do that. michelle smith. chris. christopher rugaber. thank you. chris rugaber, associated press. you have talked about inflation a few times and mentioned oil prices, china lockdowns. but aside from rises in commodity prices such as gas prices, we’re also seeing stickier measures of inflation increasing, such as the cleveland fed’s median and trimmed mean cpis. i mean, how persistent do you see those underlying measures of inflation, and how do you expect to—where do you see those going in the near future? chair powell. so, as i mentioned, i think, in my opening statement, inflation has started—it started off in quite narrow, very directly pandemic-related areas, and it’s spread now broadly across the economy and into the services sector as well. it was really in the goods sector at the beginning. and, particularly, you’re seeing in travel now, if you’ve flown on a plane lately—planes are very full, and plane tickets are very expensive. some of that will be pass- through of energy prices, but it’s—so you’re experiencing services inflation. shelter inflation is high. so the question—and then you see the cleveland measure going up, and many other measures are going up. so it’s a time when we’re not seeing progress and we want to see  progress, and that’s really another part of why we did what we did today and why the sep looks like it does. we see it as appropriate to get the policy rate up to restrictive levels, which would be, in the thinking of the committee, somewhere in the range of 3 to 3½ percent by year-end. and then after that, you see what the rest of the sep says. so i hope that’s responsive to your question. michelle smith. nancy. nancy marshall-genzer. hi, chair powell. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. do you still think a softish landing is possible, and how would you define that at this point considering the revised projections for unemployment, gdp, inflation? chair powell. so i think what’s in the sep would certainly meet that test. if you see—you’re looking at getting back down to almost a 2 percent inflation by 2024, and the unemployment rate is still as low as 4.1 percent. that would be—i would call that as meeting that test. do i still think that we can do that? i do. i think there’s—i think there’s—i don’t want to be the handicapper here. i just—that is our objective, and i do think it’s possible. like i said, though, i think that events of the last few months have raised the degree of difficulty, created great challenges. and, again, the answer to the question, can we still do it—there’s a much bigger chance now that it’ll depend on factors that we don’t control, which is, fluctuations and spikes in commodity prices could wind up taking that option out of our hands. so we just don’t know, but we’re focused on—very, very focused on getting inflation back down to 2 percent, which we think is essential for the benefit of the public and also to put us on a path back to a sustainably strong labor market like the one we had before the pandemic. michelle smith. greg.  greg robb. thank you. greg robb from marketwatch. chair powell, i was wondering if you could talk a little bit more—economists are worried that you’re kind of hitting the economy with a sledgehammer and that now there’s even more risk of a recession than a 50–50 path of rates. so could you talk a little bit more about that? and what evidence would get you to stop rate hikes and maybe even reverse them? chair powell. sure. so, as i mentioned, financial conditions have tightened over the last seven months, and that’s a good thing, we think. but the federal funds rate, even after this increase, is at 1.6 percent. so it’s hard to see how that is too high of a rate. and even if we did another—so we’re going to get here by the end of the summer, somewhere in the 2s probably. still, that’s still a low rate. so that’s not a rate that is calculated to bring a recession on. and we’ll—by then, we’ll have seen a whole lot more data. as i mentioned a couple times, the committee’s views are around a modestly restrictive stance, which will be in the 3 to 3½ percent range by the end of this year, but that’s conditioned on that being the appropriate thing to do. if we see data going in a different direction, it’ll be reflected in our policy, as you see today. we’ll be watching—if things go in a direction we don’t expect, then we’re going to adapt. and i would say, this is a highly uncertain environment—extraordinarily uncertain environment. so, again, we’ll be determined and resolved, but flexible. michelle smith. okay. evan. evan ryser. evan ryser, market news international. thank you, chair powell. i was wondering if the fed has initiated a review of the conduct of monetary policy over the last two years or so, given the inflation, and will that be shared with the public? and then, secondly, given the illiquidity and the extraordinary volatility in financial markets, are you concerned that qt will make that worse?  chair powell. sorry, what was your question on qt? evan ryser. just given the illiquidity and extraordinary volatility in financial markets, whether qt will make things worse. chair powell. so, of course, we’ve been looking very carefully and hard at why inflation picked up so much more than expected last year and why it proved so persistent. we— it’s hard to overstate the extent of interest we have in that question morning, noon, and night. but you have to understand the context. for—really, the context is this: for decades before the pandemic and the reopening, you had a world where inflation was dominated by disinflationary forces such as declining population or aging demographics, let’s call it that, globalization enabled by technology, other factors, low productivity. so and that’s how all the models work is, decades and decades of data—they look at that. it’s a very flat philips curve world, and the supply shocks tend to be transient, right? so we have now experienced an extraordinary series of shocks, if you think about it: the pandemic, the response, the reopening, inflation, followed by the war in ukraine, followed by shutdowns in china—the war in ukraine potentially having effects for years here. so we’re aware that a different set of forces are driving the economy—we have been, obviously, for quite a while. but this is a different—these forces are different. inflation is behaving differently, and, in our thinking, it really is a question of very strong demand. but you couldn’t get this kind of inflation without a change on the supply side, which is there for anybody to see, which is these blockages and shortages and people dropping out of the labor force and things like that. so that’s how we’re looking at it. and we’ve done a lot of work internally on, and thinking about, what all that means. you don’t—the thing is, you don’t know whether those forces are—to what extent are they going to be sustained? in other words, will we go back to a world where it looks a little more like the  old world, or are we really going to be in a world where major supply shocks go on and on? the history is, you see these waves of supply shocks, as you did in the ’70s, and then they go away, and sort of there’s a “new normal,” and things settle down. but, honestly, we don’t know what that’s going to be. in the meantime, we have to find price stability in this new world and maximum employment in this new world where, clearly, inflationary forces are—you’re seeing them everywhere. again, if you look around the world at where inflation levels are, it’s absolutely extraordinary. it’s not just here. in fact, we’re sort of in the middle of the pack, although i think we have, of course, a different kind of inflation than other people have, partly because our economy is stronger and more highly recovered. so that’s what we’re doing. we’ve done a lot of introspection and work on that and—sorry, on qt, we’ve communicated really clearly to the markets about what we’re going to do there. markets seem to be okay with it. we’re phasing in—treasury [security] issuance is down quite a lot, quite a lot from where it’s been, so i have no reason to think—markets are forward looking, and they see this coming. i have no reason to think it will lead to illiquidity and problems. it seems to be kind of understood and accepted at this point. michelle smith. thanks. for the last question, we’ll go to mark hamrick. mark hamrick. mr. chairman, mark hamrick with bankrate. i wonder what your assessment is about the outlook for the housing market, given the years-long increase in home prices and now the sharp rise in mortgage rates. and all that, of course, given the heightened sensitivity around the housing market given the fact that it was a trigger for the great financial crisis over a decade ago. thank you. chair powell. sure. so rates were very low—a good place to start is that rates were very, very low for quite a while because of the pandemic and the need to do everything we could  to support the economy when unemployment was 14 percent and the true unemployment rate was well higher than that. and that was a—rates are low, and now they’re coming back up to more normal, or above, levels. so, in the meantime, while rates were low and while demand was really high, obviously demand for housing changed from wanting to live in urban areas to some extent to living in single-family homes in the suburbs, famously. and so the demand was just suddenly much higher. and we saw prices moving up very, very strongly for the last couple of years. so that changes now, and rates have moved up—we’re well aware that mortgage rates have moved up a lot—and you’re seeing a changing housing market. we’re watching it to see what will happen. how much will it really affect residential investment? not really sure. how much will it affect housing prices? not really sure. it’s—i mean, obviously, we’re watching that quite carefully. you would think over time—i mean, so there’s a tremendous amount of supply in the housing market of unfinished homes, and as those come on line—whereas the supply of finished homes, inventory of finished homes that are for sale, is incredibly low, historically low. so it’s still a very tight market. so prices may keep going up for a while even in a world where rates are up. so it’s a complicated situation. we watch it very carefully. i would say if you’re a homebuyer, somebody or a young person looking to buy a home, you need a bit of a reset. we need to get back to a place where supply and demand are back together and where inflation is down low again and mortgage rates are low again. so this will be a process whereby we—ideally, we do our work in a way that the housing market settles in a new place and housing availability and credit availability are at appropriate levels. so thank you very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 3 attended tuesday’s session only. 2 page 2 federal open market committee  edward nelson and robert j. tetlow,4 senior advisers, division of monetary affairs, board christopher j. gust, associate director, division of monetary affairs, board james p. bergin, marc giannoni, giovanni olivei, paolo a. pesenti, and robert g. valletta, senior vice presidents, federal reserve banks of new york, dallas, boston, new york, and san francisco, respectively shane m. sherlund, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board roc armenter, vice president, federal reserve bank of philadelphia giovanni favara and etienne gagnon,3 assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board; paul lengermann and byron lutz, assistant directors, division of research and statistics, board alisdair g. mckay, senior research economist, federal reserve bank of minneapolis penelope a. beattie,3 section chief, office of the secretary, board; valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board alyssa arute,2 manager, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board ayelen banegas and anna orlik,3 principal economists, division of monetary affairs, board; stephen f. lin, principal economist, division of research and statistics, board giovanni nicolò, arsenios skaperdas, and hiroatsu tanaka, senior economists, division of monetary affairs, board; cisil sarisoy, senior economist, division of international finance, board achilles sangster ii, senior information manager, division of monetary affairs, board david na, senior financial institution and policy analyst, division of monetary affairs, board jose acosta, senior communications analyst, division of information technology, board kathleen o. paese, first vice president, federal reserve bank of st. louis david altig, kartik b. athreya, michelle m. neal, and anna paulson, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of atlanta, richmond, new york, and chicago, respectively attended from the discussion of the economic and financial situation through the end of wednesday’s session. 4 developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager of the system open market account (soma) turned first to a discussion of financial developments. over the intermeeting period, there were significant swings in asset prices, and financial conditions tightened, on net, as market participants assessed incoming information about the economy. in the united states, near-term policy rate expectations shifted markedly toward the end of the period, particularly after the release of the may consumer price index (cpi) report. ahead of the release of the report, market expectations reflected a broad consensus that there would be 50 basis point rate increases at both the june and july fomc meetings. after the release of the higher-than-expected inflation data, policy-sensitive rates pointed instead to a considerable probability of 75 basis point moves at both the june and july meetings. the market-implied path of the federal funds rate moved higher at longer horizons as well. market participants noted elevated uncertainty about the economic and monetary policy outlook. across the yield curve, rates on nominal treasury securities ended the period significantly higher, primarily reflecting the revision in the outlook for monetary policy and the associated rise in real yields. market-based measures of inflation compensation continued to indicate expectations that inflation would decline notably in coming quarters, and measures of medium-term inflation compensation fell over the intermeeting period. market participants reported that while liquidity conditions in the market for treasury securities had been affected by the elevated volatility in rates and larger trades were having an increased effect on pricing, overall market functioning had held up. responding to higher in- minutes of the meeting of june 14–15, 2022 page 3  terest rates and some concerns about the growth outlook, equity prices moved substantially lower over the period. the manager turned next to a discussion of developments related to foreign central banks. most major foreign central banks were proceeding on a path of removing policy accommodation in order to address elevated levels of inflation. several—including those of canada, australia, and new zealand—had raised their policy rates 50 basis points over the intermeeting period, and some signaled the potential need for more forceful tightening in order to address inflation risks. the european central bank (ecb) announced an end to its asset purchase program and signaled an intention to lift policy rates in july. meanwhile, the stance of monetary policy in japan was generally expected to remain highly accommodative, though recent upward pressure on japanese government bond yields had led the bank of japan (boj) to step up its efforts to defend its yield curve control target. on balance, market participants were focused on the largely synchronous shift toward monetary policy tightening across most advanced economies. regarding money market developments, the manager noted that the 50 basis point increase in the target range at the may fomc meeting passed through to the effective federal funds rate and was also transmitted to other overnight rates. the federal funds rate held steady at 83 basis points throughout the period, while the secured overnight financing rate softened, on net, falling to the bottom of the federal funds target range later in the period. contacts attributed the downward pressure on secured rates to high liquidity levels and declining treasury bill supply, as well as elevated uncertainty about the interest rate path, which had increased demand for shortterm investments. in this environment, participation in the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility increased, and a greater share of activity in overnight private repurchase agreement (repo) markets was conducted by lenders who lacked access to the facility. the manager noted that, if on rrp usage continued to rise, it may be appropriate at some point to consider further lifting the per-counterparty limit. over the longer term, on rrp usage was expected to fall, with the reduction in the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet resulting in a gradual rise in money market rates relative to the on rrp rate. the deputy manager turned next to a discussion of federal reserve operations and related topics. in accordance with the directive to the open market desk, the reduction in soma securities holdings began in june, under the initial monthly caps on redemptions of $30 billion for treasury securities and $17.5 billion for agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs). under current staff projections, the soma portfolio was anticipated to decline roughly $400 billion by the end of 2022. as noted in the recent soma annual report and reported in the board’s first-quarter financial statements for the federal reserve system, the soma portfolio had an unrealized loss, reflecting the increase in longer-term interest rates. unrealized losses had no implications for federal reserve income and would eventually fall to zero as securities reached maturity. the staff projected that soma net income would decline and potentially turn negative, with increases in the target range lifting the interest expense on some liabilities, and that this eventuality could result in a deferred asset entry on the federal reserve’s balance sheet. neither unrealized losses on the federal reserve’s existing securities portfolio nor negative net income would impair the implementation of monetary policy or the federal reserve’s ability to achieve its dual-mandate objectives. on other operational matters, the deputy manager noted that, over the intermeeting period, the desk onboarded three depository institutions as new counterparties for the standing repo facility (srf), resulting in a total of nine depository institutions approved, to date, as srf counterparties. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the june 14–15 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) was rebounding to a moderate rate of increase in the second quarter after having declined in the first quarter. the labor market remained very tight, but there were some signs that momentum was slowing. consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12‑month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—remained elevated in april, and available information suggested that inflation was still elevated in may. total nonfarm payroll employment rose solidly in april and may, though the pace of increase was slower than in the first quarter, and the unemployment rate remained unchanged at 3.6 percent. the unemployment rates for african americans and for hispanics were little page 4 federal open market committee  changed, on net, though both rates remained noticeably higher than the national average. on net, the labor force participation rate edged down between march and may, while the employment-to-population ratio was unchanged. the private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, edged lower in april but remained at a high level. nominal wage growth remained elevated, with average hourly earnings having risen 5.2 percent over the 12 months ending in may, and the increases were widespread across industries. consumer price inflation remained elevated. total pce price inflation was 6.3 percent over the 12 months ending in april, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.9 percent over the same period. the trimmed mean measure of 12‑month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 3.8 percent in april, nearly 2 percentage points higher than its year-earlier rate of increase. in may, the 12-month change in the cpi was 8.6 percent, while core cpi inflation was 6.0 percent over the same period. measures of inflation expectations derived from surveys of professional forecasters and of consumers generally suggested that inflation was expected to remain high in the short run but then fall back toward levels consistent with a longer-run rate of 2 percent. production and spending indicators were mixed but generally remained strong. consumer spending and industrial production posted sizable gains in april. however, retail sales declined in may, data on home sales and single-family housing starts moved down in april, some indicators of manufacturing activity weakened in may, and the university of michigan surveys of consumers measure of consumer sentiment decreased noticeably in the preliminary june reading. supply disruptions appeared to have improved in some sectors (such as general merchandise retailers) but to have deteriorated in others (such as materials for home construction). on balance, the available indicators suggested that private domestic final purchases were increasing at a slower pace in the second quarter than in the first quarter. and with the available trade data for april pointing to a rebound in exports and a moderation in import growth in the second quarter, gdp growth appeared to be rebounding after having declined in the first quarter. regarding trade, real imports of goods stepped back in april from their exceptional strength in march, driven by a decline in consumer goods imports. by contrast, real goods exports grew in both march and april after declining in the previous two months, following some normalization in categories such as soybeans and pharmaceuticals, which can exhibit large and idiosyncratic changes. exports and imports of services continued to be held back by an incomplete recovery of international travel. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit widened to a record size in march and then reversed that widening in april. incoming data suggested that the global reverberations from lockdown measures to deal with the spread of the covid-19 virus in china and the russian invasion of ukraine slowed foreign economic growth. in china, activity indicators pointed to a sizable restraint on economic activity. the russian invasion of ukraine continued to have an imprint on foreign activity, with persistent stresses in global commodity markets and declining consumer and business confidence, especially in europe. inflation abroad moved higher, driven by further increases in consumer energy and food prices as well as some additional broadening of price pressures to core goods and services. central banks around the world further tightened their monetary policy stances to curb high inflation. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, u.s. treasury yields and the market-implied federal funds rate path moved substantially higher on net. broad domestic equity price indexes declined considerably, on balance, amid elevated market volatility. in most advanced foreign economies (afes), sovereign yields also increased further, and foreign equity price indexes moved lower. despite further increases in borrowing costs, financing conditions in domestic credit markets remained generally accommodative. the credit quality of firms, municipalities, and households remained largely stable, although the outlook for credit quality had begun to deteriorate somewhat. since the previous fomc meeting, 2-, 5-, and 10-year nominal treasury yields increased considerably on net. early in the intermeeting period, treasury yields moved lower amid rising concerns about a weakening u.s. growth outlook and federal reserve communications perceived as lowering the chances of large policy rate hikes at upcoming meetings. however, yields increased late in the period, with economic data releases largely being interpreted as highlighting the possibility of a more aggressive tightening of monetary policy. the expected federal funds rate path—implied by a straight read of overnight index swap quotes—also increased notably on balance. real yields increased more than their nominal minutes of the meeting of june 14–15, 2022 page 5  counterparts, while inflation compensation implied by treasury inflation-protected securities declined. broad equity price indexes fell sharply over the intermeeting period on net. the stock price declines were largely associated with mixed corporate earnings news early in the period and increasing concerns about the economic outlook amid global policy tightening. onemonth option-implied volatility on the s&p 500 index— the vix—increased moderately, on balance, remaining elevated relative to its historical distribution and significantly above average pre-pandemic levels. spreads on investment-grade and, to a greater extent, speculativegrade corporate bonds widened notably, on net, reaching levels comparable with those at the end of 2018. this widening of spreads was associated with increased concerns about the outlook for corporate credit amid monetary policy tightening. since the previous fomc meeting, spreads on municipal bonds narrowed substantially, on net, moving near levels observed for several years before the pandemic, as investor demand exhibited some recovery over much of the period from earlier weak levels. conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period, with the may increase in the federal reserve’s administered rates passing through promptly to overnight money market rates. spreads on longer-tenor commercial paper (cp) and negotiable certificates of deposit narrowed moderately, with no signs of spillovers beyond the stablecoin market following the collapse of a large algorithmic stablecoin. indeed, cp outstanding increased slightly over the period. money market fund (mmf) net yields across all fund types rose notably, as increases in administered rates passed through to money market instruments. secured overnight rates softened significantly relative to the on rrp offering rate since the may fomc meeting, with the downward pressure on rates attributed to continuing declines in net treasury bill issuance, elevated demand for collateral in the form of treasury securities, and mmfs maintaining very short portfolio maturities amid uncertainty about the pace of anticipated policy rate increases. consistent with the downward pressure on repo rates, daily take-up in the on rrp facility increased further. sovereign yields in most afes rose over the intermeeting period amid investors’ concerns about further inflationary pressures and major central banks’ policy communications suggesting a firmer stance of policy. interest rate volatility in afes increased, consistent with in- creased uncertainty about the path of policy rates. concerns about the global growth outlook weighed on equity prices, and the broad dollar edged up. implied equity price volatility remained at elevated levels. japanese yields and equity prices, however, ended the period about unchanged, as the boj reaffirmed its accommodative monetary policy stance. sovereign bond spreads over german bund yields for euro-area peripheral countries widened further. these moves were partially retraced following an unscheduled meeting of the ecb on june 15, at which the ecb indicated that it would take action to address potential fragmentation risk in euroarea sovereign bond markets. outflows from emerging market-dedicated funds intensified in early may, especially from local currency bond funds, and credit spreads in emerging market economies widened moderately. in domestic credit markets, financing conditions for most businesses and households remained generally accommodative over the intermeeting period. credit remained widely available, particularly to higher-rated firms and consumers with higher credit scores. gross nonfinancial corporate bond issuance slowed in may, especially among speculative-grade issuers, amid elevated market volatility and high yields. gross institutional leveraged loan issuance decelerated and initial public offering volumes remained extremely slow in may, while gross issuance of municipal bonds remained robust. commercial and industrial (c&i) and commercial real estate (cre) loans on banks’ balance sheets expanded at a rapid pace in april and may. issuance of both agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) stepped down slightly in may from its strong pace earlier in the year. small business loan originations through april were in line with pre-pandemic levels and indicated that credit appeared to be available. residential mortgage credit remained widely available through may for most borrowers. while refinance volumes continued trending lower in april and may amid higher mortgage rates, outstanding balances of home equity lines of credit at commercial banks posted the first significant increase in more than a decade, likely reflecting a substitution by homeowners away from cash-out refinances. in consumer credit markets, auto loans outstanding grew at a robust pace in the first quarter, consistent with a rebound in auto sales, but slowed in april and may. credit card balances at commercial banks rose in april at the fastest pace seen in recent decades, but growth slowed in may. page 6 federal open market committee  borrowing costs had continued to increase in many sectors since the previous fomc meeting. yields on nonfinancial corporate bonds remained well above prepandemic levels, and new issuance spreads for institutional leveraged loans ticked up in may. bank interest rates for both c&i and cre loans also increased. among small businesses that borrow on a regular basis, the share facing higher borrowing costs rose in both april and may. borrowing costs for residential mortgage loans increased significantly over the intermeeting period, in line with the increases in mbs and treasury yields, reaching their highest levels since 2010. in consumer credit markets, rates on auto loans and new credit card offers continued to trend upward. despite the historically low volumes of defaults on both corporate bonds and leveraged loans in april, in the later weeks of the intermeeting period the volume of credit rating downgrades of leveraged loans exceeded the volume of upgrades. in addition, market indicators of future default expectations of businesses deteriorated to some extent, as investors appeared to mark down their assessment of the macroeconomic outlook. credit quality of business loans on banks’ books remained sound, with c&i and cre delinquency rates continuing to be low through march. nonetheless, banks allocated net positive loan loss provisions in the first quarter of this year. this development reversed a pattern of loan loss reserves being released throughout last year and reflected concerns about the credit quality outlook. delinquency rates on cmbs and small business loans continued to decline, and the credit quality of municipal securities remained strong. household credit quality remained solid, with the share of consumers with subprime credit scores still near historical lows. in addition, mortgage delinquencies and the share of mortgages in forbearance both continued to trend down in recent months. while nonprime auto loan delinquency rates edged down a touch in the first quarter, credit card delinquency rates for account holders with below-prime credit scores inched up from low levels. the sizable increases in credit card purchase volumes through march were roughly offset by high levels of credit card payments, thus increasing household borrowing only slightly. staff economic outlook the projection for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the june fomc meeting implied a trajectory for real gdp that was lower than in the may projection. the staff continued to project that gdp growth would rebound in the second quarter and remain solid over the remainder of the year. however, monetary policy was assumed to be less accommodative than in the previous projection, and the recent and prospective tightening of financial conditions led the staff to reduce its gdp growth forecast for the second half of 2022 and for 2023. the level of real gdp was still expected to remain well above potential over the projection period, though the gap was projected to narrow significantly this year and to narrow a little further next year. labor market conditions also were expected to remain very tight, albeit somewhat less so than in the previous projection. with regard to pce price inflation, the staff revised up its projection for the second half of 2022 in response to stronger-than-expected wage growth and the staff’s assessment that the boost to inflation from supply– demand imbalances in the economy, including in food and energy markets, would be more persistent than previously assumed. all told, total pce price inflation was expected to be 5.0 percent in 2022, while core inflation was expected to be 4.1 percent. pce price inflation was then expected to step down to 2.4 percent in 2023 and to 2.0 percent in 2024, as energy prices were forecast to decline and as supply–demand imbalances were projected to diminish because of slowing aggregate demand and an easing of supply constraints. similarly, core inflation was projected to slow to 2.6 percent in 2023 and to 2.2 percent in 2024. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside and that the risks to the inflation projection were skewed to the upside. the staff judged that the ongoing war in ukraine remained a possible source of even greater upward pressure on energy and commodity prices, while the war and adverse developments associated with china’s zero-covid policy were both perceived as increasing the risk that supply chain disruptions and production constraints would be further exacerbated in the united states and abroad. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2022 through 2024 and over the longer run based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of minutes of the meeting of june 14–15, 2022 page 7  further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections (sep) was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. participants stressed the need to adjust the stance of policy in response to incoming information regarding the evolution of these and other factors. in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that overall economic activity appeared to have picked up after edging down in the first quarter. job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. participants recognized that the invasion of ukraine by russia was causing tremendous human and economic hardship for the ukrainian people. participants judged that the invasion and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. in addition, participants indicated that covid-related lockdowns in china were likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. against this background, participants stated that they were highly attentive to inflation risks. in their discussion of the household sector, participants indicated that consumption spending had remained robust, in part reflecting strong balance sheets in the household sector and a tight labor market. several participants noted that household spending patterns appeared to be shifting away from goods to services. several participants indicated that some of their contacts reported that the pace of consumer spending, though strong, was beginning to moderate. one reason cited for this moderation was that the purchasing power of households was being reduced by higher prices for food, energy, and other essentials. participants generally expected higher mortgage interest rates to contribute to further declines in home sales, and a couple of participants noted that housing activity in their districts had begun to slow noticeably. against the backdrop of rising borrowing costs and higher gasoline and food prices, a couple of participants commented that consumer sentiment had dropped notably in june, according to the preliminary reading in the michigan survey. with regard to the economic outlook, participants noted that recent indicators suggested that real gdp growth was expanding in the current quarter, with consumption spending remaining strong. participants generally judged that growth in business fixed investment appeared to be slowing, and activity in the housing sector appeared to be softening, in part as a result of a sharp rise in mortgage rates. correspondingly, participants indicated that they had revised down their projections of real gdp growth for this year, consistent with ongoing supply chain disruptions and tighter financial conditions. participants noted that the imbalance between supply and demand across a wide range of product markets was contributing to upward pressure on inflation. they saw an appropriate firming of monetary policy and associated tighter financial conditions as playing a central role in helping address this imbalance and in supporting the federal reserve’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. an easing of supply bottlenecks, a further rise in labor force participation, and the waning effects of pandemic-related fiscal policy support were cited as additional factors that could help reduce the supply– demand imbalances in the economy and therefore lower inflation over the next few years. that said, the timing and magnitude of these effects were uncertain. participants saw little evidence to date of a substantial improvement in supply constraints, and some of them judged that the economic effects of these constraints were likely to persist longer than they had previously anticipated. with respect to the business sector, participants observed that their contacts generally reported that sales remained strong, although some contacts indicated that sales had begun to slow and that they had become less optimistic about the outlook. in many industries, the ability of firms to meet demand continued to be limited by labor shortages and supply chain bottlenecks. firms relying on international sources for their inputs were seen as encountering particularly acute supply chain disruptions. supply constraints, labor shortages, and rising input costs were also reportedly limiting energy and agricultural producers’ ability to take advantage of the higher prices of their products by investing and expanding their production capacity. similarly, a few participants noted that, in other sectors of the economy, their contacts reported that they were postponing investment or construction projects because of rising input and financing costs. with supply challenges still widespread, contacts continued to assess that supply constraints overall were significant, and many of them judged that these constraints were likely to persist for some time. participants noted that the demand for labor continued to outstrip available supply across many parts of the economy. they observed that various indicators pointed to a very tight labor market. these indicators included an unemployment rate near a 50-year low, job vacancies at historical highs, and elevated nominal wage page 8 federal open market committee  growth. additionally, most business contacts had continued to report persistent wage pressures as well as difficulties in hiring and retaining workers. however, some contacts reported that, because of previous wage hikes, hiring and retention had improved and pressure for additional wage increases appeared to be receding. employment growth, while moderating somewhat from its pace earlier in the year, had remained robust. several participants observed that labor force participation remained below its pre-pandemic level because of the unusually large number of retirements during the pandemic and judged that the labor force participation rate was unlikely to move up considerably in the near term. a couple of participants raised the possibility that tight labor markets would spur investment in automation by firms, boosting labor productivity. while labor markets were anticipated to remain tight in the near term, participants expected labor demand and supply to come into better balance over time, helping to ease upward pressure on wages and prices. as in the case of product markets, they anticipated that an appropriate firming of monetary policy would play a central role in helping address imbalances in the labor market. with the tightness in labor markets anticipated to diminish over time, participants generally expected the unemployment rate to increase, as the median projection of the unemployment rate in the june sep showed a gradual rise over the next few years, reaching 4.1 percent in 2024. in light of the very high level of job vacancies, a number of participants judged that the expected moderation in labor demand relative to supply might primarily affect vacancies and have a less significant effect on the unemployment rate. participants noted that inflation remained much too high and observed that it continued to run well above the committee’s longer-run 2 percent objective, with total pce prices having risen 6.3 percent over the 12 months ending in april. they also observed that the 12-month change in the cpi in may came in above expectations. participants were concerned that the may cpi release indicated that inflation pressures had yet to show signs of abating, and a number of them saw it as solidifying the view that inflation would be more persistent than they had previously anticipated. they commented on the hardship caused by elevated inflation, with low- and moderate-income households especially affected. these households had to spend more of their budgets on essentials such as food, energy, and housing and were less able to bear the rapidly rising costs of these essentials. in that context, some participants noted that their contacts had reported that low- and moderateincome consumers were shifting purchases to lower-cost goods. participants also stressed that persistently high inflation would impede the achievement of maximum employment on a sustained basis. participants judged that strong aggregate demand, together with supply constraints that had been larger and longer lasting than expected, continued to contribute to price pressures across a broad array of goods and services. they noted that the surge in prices of oil and other commodities associated with russia’s invasion of ukraine was boosting gasoline and food prices and putting additional upward pressure on inflation. participants commented on the global nature of inflation pressures, and a few of them added that many foreign central banks were also firming the stance of monetary policy. several participants judged that a shift in spending from goods to services was likely to be associated with less upward pressure on prices in the goods sector, but also an intensification of upward pressure on prices in the services sector. participants had revised up their pce inflation projections for 2022 in their june sep submissions, largely in response to higher-than-expected inflation readings and the slower anticipated resolution of supply constraints. they expected that the appropriate firming of monetary policy and an eventual easing of supply and demand imbalances would bring inflation back down to levels roughly consistent with the committee’s longer-run objectives by 2024 and keep longerterm inflation expectations well anchored. participants observed that some measures of inflation expectations had moved up recently, including the staff index of common inflation expectations and the expectations of inflation over the next 5 to 10 years provided in the michigan survey. with respect to market-based measures, however, a few participants noted that medium-term measures of inflation compensation fell over the intermeeting period and longer-term measures were unchanged. while measures of longer-term inflation expectations derived from surveys of households, professional forecasters, and market participants were generally judged to be broadly consistent with the committee’s longer-run 2 percent inflation objective, many participants raised the concern that longer-run inflation expectations could be beginning to drift up to levels inconsistent with the 2 percent objective. these participants noted that, if inflation expectations were to become unanchored, it would be more costly to bring inflation back down to the committee’s objective. minutes of the meeting of june 14–15, 2022 page 9  in their discussion of risks, participants emphasized that they were highly attentive to inflation risks and were closely monitoring developments regarding both inflation and inflation expectations. most agreed that risks to inflation were skewed to the upside and cited several such risks, including those associated with ongoing supply bottlenecks and rising energy and commodity prices. participants judged that uncertainty about economic growth over the next couple of years was elevated. in that context, a couple of them noted that gdp and gross domestic income had been giving conflicting signals recently regarding the pace of economic growth, making it challenging to determine the economy’s underlying momentum. most participants assessed that the risks to the outlook for economic growth were skewed to the downside. downside risks included the possibility that a further tightening in financial conditions would have a larger negative effect on economic activity than anticipated as well as the possibilities that the russian invasion of ukraine and the covid-related lockdowns in china would have larger-than-expected effects on economic growth. in their consideration of the appropriate stance of monetary policy, participants concurred that the labor market was very tight, inflation was well above the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective, and the near-term inflation outlook had deteriorated since the time of the may meeting. against this backdrop, almost all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 75 basis points at this meeting. one participant favored a 50 basis point increase in the target range at this meeting instead of 75 basis points. all participants judged that it was appropriate to continue the process of reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that the committee issued in may. in light of elevated inflation pressures and signs of deterioration in some measures of inflation expectations, all participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective. participants observed that a return of inflation to the 2 percent objective was necessary for creating conditions conducive to a sustainably strong labor market over time. in discussing potential policy actions at upcoming meetings, participants continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate to achieve the committee’s objectives. in particular, participants judged that an increase of 50 or 75 basis points would likely be appropriate at the next meeting. participants concurred that the economic outlook warranted moving to a restrictive stance of policy, and they recognized the possibility that an even more restrictive stance could be appropriate if elevated inflation pressures were to persist. participants noted that, with the federal funds rate expected to be near or above estimates of its longer-run level later this year, the committee would then be well positioned to determine the appropriate pace of further policy firming and the extent to which economic developments warranted policy adjustments. they also remarked that the pace of rate increases and the extent of future policy tightening would depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. many participants noted that the committee’s credibility with regard to bringing inflation back to the 2 percent objective, together with previous communications, had been helpful in shifting market expectations of future policy and had already contributed to a notable tightening of financial conditions that would likely help reduce inflation pressures by restraining aggregate demand. participants recognized that ongoing policy firming would be appropriate if economic conditions evolved as expected. at the current juncture, with inflation remaining well above the committee’s objective, participants remarked that moving to a restrictive stance of policy was required to meet the committee’s legislative mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. in addition, such a stance would be appropriate from a risk management perspective because it would put the committee in a better position to implement more restrictive policy if inflation came in higher than expected. many participants judged that a significant risk now facing the committee was that elevated inflation could become entrenched if the public began to question the resolve of the committee to adjust the stance of policy as warranted. on this matter, participants stressed that appropriate firming of monetary policy, together with clear and effective communications, would be essential in restoring price stability. participants remarked that developments associated with russia’s invasion of ukraine, the covid-related lockdowns in china, and other factors restraining supply conditions would affect the inflation outlook and that it would likely take some time for inflation to move down to the committee’s 2 percent objective. participants also judged that maintaining a strong labor market during the process of bringing inflation down to 2 percent would depend on many factors affecting demand and supply. participants recognized that policy firming could slow page 10 federal open market committee  the pace of economic growth for a time, but they saw the return of inflation to 2 percent as critical to achieving maximum employment on a sustained basis. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that overall economic activity appeared to have picked up after edging down in the first quarter. job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. members also agreed that inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. members concurred that the invasion of ukraine by russia was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. members agreed that the invasion and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. with the effects of the invasion of ukraine by russia already materializing, members considered it appropriate to omit from the june statement the sentence conveying the high uncertainty associated with the implications of the invasion for the u.s. economy. members also agreed that covid-related lockdowns in china were likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. in light of these developments, members remarked that they remain highly attentive to the upside risks to inflation and would be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. in their assessment of the monetary policy stance necessary for achieving the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1½ to 1¾ percent and anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate. in addition, members agreed that the committee would continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mbs, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in may. one member preferred to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 50 basis points to 1¼ to 1½ percent at this meeting. members judged that, with high and widespread inflation pressures and some measures of longer-term inflation expectations moving up somewhat, it would be appropriate for the postmeeting statement to note that the committee was strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. as the further firming in the policy stance would likely result in some slowing in economic growth and tempering in labor market condi- tions, members also agreed to remove the previous statement language that had indicated an expectation that appropriate policy would result in a return of inflation to 2 percent and a strong labor market. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. they also concurred that their assessments would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective june 16, 2022, the federal open market committee directs the desk to:  undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1½ to 1¾ percent.  conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 1.75 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 1.55 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in the calendar months of june and july that exceeds a cap of $30 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. minutes of the meeting of june 14–15, 2022 page 11   reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in the calendar months of june and july that exceeds a cap of $17.5 billion per month.  allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “overall economic activity appears to have picked up after edging down in the first quarter. job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. the invasion of ukraine by russia is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. the invasion and related events are creating additional upward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. in addition, covid-related lockdowns in china are likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. the committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in may. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, james bullard, lisa d. cook, patrick harker, philip n. jefferson, loretta j. mester, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: esther l. george. patrick harker voted as an alternate member at this meeting. president george dissented because she judged that a large increase in the target range for the federal funds rate would add to uncertainty about policy concurrent with the beginning of balance sheet runoff in ways that could unsettle households and businesses and could also adversely affect the ability of small banks to meet the credit needs of their communities. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1½ to 1¾ percent and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 1.65 percent, effective june 16, 2022. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve a ¾ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 1.75 percent, effective june 16, 2022.5 in taking this action, the board approved a request to establish that rate submitted by the board of directors of the federal reserve bank of minneapolis. this vote also encompassed approval by the board of governors of the establishment of a 1.75 percent primary credit rate by the remaining federal reserve banks, effective on the later of june 16, 2022, or the date such reserve banks inform the secretary of the board of such a request. (secretary’s note: subsequently, other federal reserve banks were informed of the secretary of the board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 1.75 percent, effective june 16, 2022, for the federal reserve banks of boston, new york, philadelphia, cleveland, richmond, chicago, st. louis, kansas city, and 5 page 12 federal open market committee  it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, july 26–27, 2022. the meeting adjourned at 10:45 a.m. on june 15, 2022. notation vote by notation vote completed on may 24, 2022, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on may 3–4, 2022.  james a. clouse secretary dallas, and effective june 17, 2022, for the federal reserve banks of atlanta and san francisco.) 
uly 27, 2022 chair powell. good afternoon. my colleagues and i are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down, and we’re moving expeditiously to do so. we have both the tools we need and the resolve it will take to restore price stability on behalf of american families and businesses. the economy and the country have been through a lot over the past two and a half years and have proved resilient. it is essential that we bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal if we are to have a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. from the standpoint of our congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability, the current picture is plain to see: the labor market is extremely tight, and inflation is much too high. against this backdrop, today the fomc raised its policy interest rate by ¾ of a percentage point and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate. in addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. and i’ll have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. recent indicators of spending and production have softened. growth in consumer spending has slowed significantly, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. activity in the housing sector has weakened, in part reflecting higher mortgage rates. and after a strong increase in the first quarter, business fixed investment also looks to have declined in the second quarter. despite these developments, the labor market has remained extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50-year low, job vacancies near historical highs, and wage growth elevated. over the past three months, employment rose by an average of 375,000 jobs per  month—down from the average pace seen earlier in the year, but still robust. improvements in labor market conditions have been widespread, including for workers at the lower end of the wage distribution as well as for african americans and hispanics. labor demand is very strong, while labor supply remains subdued, with the labor force participation rate little changed since january. overall, the continued strength of the labor market suggests that underlying aggregate demand remains solid. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. over the 12 months ending in may, total pce prices rose 6.3 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 4.7 percent. in june, the 12-month change in the consumer price index came in above expectations at 9.1 percent, and the change in the core cpi was 5.9 percent. notwithstanding the recent slowdown in overall economic activity, aggregate demand appears to remain strong, supply constraints have been larger and longer lasting than anticipated, and price pressures are evident across a broad range of goods and services. although prices for some commodities have turned down recently, the earlier surge in prices of crude oil and other commodities that resulted from russia’s war on ukraine has boosted prices for gasoline and food, creating additional upward pressure on inflation. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, especially on those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective.  at today’s meeting, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¾ of a percentage point, bringing the target range to 2¼ to 2½ percent. and we’re continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet, which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. over coming months, we will be looking for compelling evidence that inflation is moving down, consistent with inflation returning to 2 percent. we anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate; the pace of those increases will continue to depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. today’s increase is the—in the target range is the second 75 basis point increase in as many meetings. while another unusually large increase could be appropriate at our next meeting, that is a decision that will depend on the data we get between now and then. we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicating—and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. as the stance of monetary policy tightens further, it likely will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases while we assess how our cumulative policy adjustments are affecting the economy and inflation. our overarching focus is using our tools to bring demand into better balance with supply in order to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. making appropriate monetary policy in this uncertain environment requires a recognition that the economy often involves—evolves in unexpected ways. inflation has obviously surprised to the upside over the past year, and further surprises could be in store. we therefore will need to be nimble in responding to incoming data and the evolving outlook. and we will strive to avoid adding uncertainty in what is already an extraordinarily challenging and uncertain time. we are highly attentive to inflation risks and determined to take the measures necessary to return  inflation to our 2 percent longer-run goal. this process is likely to involve a period of below- trend economic growth and some softening in labor market conditions. but such outcomes are likely necessary to restore price stability and to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. let’s start with rachel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking our questions. rachel siegel from the washington post. i’m wondering if you can walk us through your thinking around the decision not to go for a full percentage point increase. we saw a ramp-up after the may cpi report came in hotter than usual and then, obviously, the june figure did, too. was there any discussion of a stronger hike at this meeting? yes. thank you. chair powell. sure. so we did judge that a 75 basis point increase was the right magnitude in light of the data and in the context of the ongoing increases in the policy rate that we’ve been making. i’d say that we wouldn’t hesitate to, to make an even larger move than we did today if the committee were to conclude that that was—that that were appropriate. that was not the case at this meeting. there was very broad support for the move that we made. you mentioned the—the june meeting. we, we had said many times that we were prepared to move aggressively, more aggressively, if inflation continued to disappoint. and that’s why we did move to a more aggressive pace at the june meeting, as we said we would do.  at this meeting, we continued at that more aggressive pace, as inflation has continued to disappoint, in the form of the june cpi reading. michelle smith. colby. colby smith. thank you so much for taking our questions. colby smith with the financial times. as the committee considers the policy path forward, how will it weigh the expected decline in headline inflation, which might come as a result of the drop in commodity prices, against the fact that we are likely to see some persistence in core readings, in particular? and given that potential tension and signs of, you know, any kind of activity weakening here, how has the committee’s thinking changed on how far into restrictive territory rates might need to go? chair powell. so i guess i’d start by saying we’ve been saying we would move expeditiously to get to the range of neutral. and i think we’ve done that now. we’re at—we’re at 2.25 to 2.5 [percent], and that’s right in the range of what we think is neutral. so the question is, how are we thinking about the path forward? so one thing that hasn’t changed is that—won’t change—is that our focus is continuing to—is going to continue to be on using our tools to bring demand back into better balance with supply in order to bring inflation back down. that’ll continue to be our overarching focus. we also said that we expect ongoing rate hikes will be appropriate and that we’ll make decisions meeting by meeting. so what are we going to be looking at? you know, we’ll be looking at the incoming data, as i mentioned, and that’ll start with economic activity. are we seeing the slowdown that we—the slowdown in economic activity—that we think we need? and there’s some evidence that we are at this time. of course, we’ll be looking at labor market  conditions. and we’ll be asking whether we see the alignment between supply and demand getting better, getting closer. of course, we’ll be looking closely at inflation. you mentioned headline and core. our mandate is for headline, of course; it’s not for core. but we look at core because core is, is actually a better indicator of headline and of all inflation going forward. so we’ll be—we’ll be looking at both. and we’ll be looking at them for—at those both, really—for what they’re saying about the outlook rather than just simply for, for what they say. but we’ll be asking: do we see inflationary pressures declining? do we see actual readings of inflation coming down? so, in light of all that data, the question we’ll be asking is whether the stance of policy we have is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent target. and it’s also worth noting that these rate hikes have been large, and they’ve come—they’ve come quickly. and it’s likely that their full effect has not been felt by the economy. so there’s probably some additional tightening, significant additional tightening, in the pipeline. so where are we going with this? i think the best—i think the committee broadly feels that we need to get policy to at least to a moderately restrictive level. and maybe the best data point for that would be what we wrote down in our sep at the—at the june meeting. so i think the median [federal funds rate] for the end of this year, the median would’ve been between 3¼ and 3½ [percent]. and, then, people wrote down 50 basis points higher than that for 2023. so that’s—even though that’s now six weeks old, i guess, that’s—that’s the most recent reading. of course, we’ll update that reading at the—at the september meeting in eight weeks. so that’s how we’re thinking about it. as i mentioned, as it relates to september, i said that another unusually large increase could be appropriate, but that’s not a decision we’re making now. it’s one that we’ll make based  on the data we see. and we’re going to be making decisions meeting by meeting. we think it’s—we think it’s time to just go to a meeting-by-meeting basis and not provide, you know, the kind of clear guidance that we had provided on the way to neutral. michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. chair powell, you’ve said that your policy works through influencing expectations and that policy needs to be at least moderately restrictive, which means you need financial conditions to stay tight. futures market pricing currently implies you will raise rates this year along the lines of your june sep but then lower them a few months later next year. are these expectations consistent with the need to keep financial conditions tight in order to moderate purchasing power and bring inflation back to 2 percent? chair powell. so i’m going to start by pointing out that it’s very hard to say with any confidence in normal times—in normal times—what the economy’s going to be doing in 6 or 12 months. and to try to predict what the appropriate monetary policy would respond— response would be—of course, we do that in the sep, but, nonetheless, you’ve got to take any estimates of what rates will be next year with a grain of salt, because there’s so much uncertainty. these are not normal times. there’s significantly more uncertainty now about the path ahead than i think there ordinarily is, and, ordinarily, it’s quite high. so, again, i would—the best data, the only data point i have for you really is the june sep, which i think is just the most recent thing that the committee’s done. since then, inflation has come in higher; economic activity has come in weaker than expected.  but at the same time, i would say that’s probably the best estimate of where the committee’s thinking is still, which is that we would get to a moderately restrictive level by the end of this year—by which i mean somewhere between 3 and 3½ percent—and that when the committee sees further rate increases in 2023, as i mentioned, we’ll update that, of course, at the september meeting. but that’s really the best i can do on that. nick timiraos. you said inflation had been a little bit hotter than anticipated. has your view of the terminal rate changed since june? chair powell. so i wouldn’t say it was—i think we didn’t expect a good reading, but this one—this one was even worse than expected, i would say. i don’t talk about my own personal estimate of, of what the terminal rate would be. i do—i will write down that in—it’s going to evolve. obviously, it has evolved over the course—i think, for all participants, it has evolved over the course of the year as we learn how persistent inflation’s going to be. and by the time of the september meeting, we will have seen two more cpi readings and two more labor market readings and a significant amount of readings about economic activity and perhaps geopolitical developments, who knows. it’ll be—it’ll be a lot. it’s an eight-week intermeeting period, so i think we’ll see quite a lot of data. and we’ll make our decision at that meeting based on that data. michelle smith. jeanna. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking our questions. jeanna smialek, new york times. you kind of alluded to this earlier, but i wonder in the event that you see several months of very weak headline inflation numbers because oil prices are coming down so much, but core inflation continues to be strong or even picks up, i wonder how you would think about that.  chair powell. so it’s hard to deal with hypotheticals, but i just would say this. we, you know, we would look at both, and we would ask—we’d be asking ourselves, are we confident that inflation is on a path down to 2 percent? that’s really the question. and we’ll be making—you know, our policy stance will be set at a level, ultimately, at which we are confident that inflation is going to be moving down to 2 percent. so you would—it would depend on a lot of things. of course, as i mentioned, core inflation is a better predictor of inflation going forward. headline inflation tends to be volatile. so, in ordinary times, you, you look through volatile moves in commodities. the problem with the current situation is that, that if you have a sustained period of supply shocks, those can actually start to undermine or to work—to work on de-anchoring inflation expectations. the public doesn’t distinguish between core and headline inflation in their thinking. so it’s something we have to take into consideration in our policymaking even though our tools don’t really work on, on some aspects of this, which are the supply-side issues. michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. steve liesman, cnbc. thanks for taking my question, mr. chairman. earlier this week, the president said, “we are not going to be in a recession.” so i have two questions off of that. do you share the president’s confidence in not being in a recession? and, second, how would or would not a recession change policy? is it a bright line, sir, where, where contraction of the economy would be a turning point in policy? or is there some amount of contraction of the economy the committee would be willing to abide in its effort to reduce inflation?  chair powell. so, as i—as i mentioned, we think it’s necessary to have growth slow down. and growth is going to be slowing down this year for a couple of reasons, one of which is that you’re coming off of the very high growth of the reopening year of 2021. you’re also seeing tighter monetary policy. and you should see some slowing. we actually think we need a period of growth below potential in order to create some slack so that—so that the supply side can catch up. we also think that there will be, in all likelihood, some softening in labor market conditions. and those are things that we expect. and we think that they’re probably necessary if we were to have—to get inflation—if we were to be able to get inflation back down on a path to 2 percent and ultimately get there. steve liesman. the question was whether you see a recession coming and how that might or might not change policy. thanks. chair powell. so we’re going to be—again, we’re going to be focused on getting inflation back down. and we—as i’ve said on other occasions, price stability is really the bedrock of the economy. and nothing works in the economy without price stability. we can’t have a strong labor market without price stability for an extended period of time. we all want to get back to the kind of labor market we had before the pandemic, where differences between, you know, racial and gender differences and that kind of thing were at historic minimums, where participation was high, where inflation was low. we want to get back to that, but that’s not happening. that’s not going to happen without, without restoring price stability. so that’s something we see as, as something that we simply must do. and we think that in the—we don’t see it as a tradeoff with, with the employment mandate. we see it as a way to facilitate the sustained achievement of the employment mandate in the longer term. michelle smith. howard.  howard schneider. howard schneider with reuters. particularly in regard to expectations, it’s been said the last few months that the risks of doing too little outweighed the lists—the risks of doing too much. does that remain the bias? chair powell. so we’re trying to do just the right amount, right? we’re not—we’re not trying to have a recession. and we don’t think we have to. we think that there’s a path for us to be able to bring inflation down while sustaining a strong labor market, as i mentioned, along with—in all likelihood—some, some softening in labor market conditions. so that is— that’s what we’re trying to achieve, and we continue to think that there’s a path to that. we know that the path has, has clearly narrowed, really based on events that are outside of our control. and it may narrow further. so, you know, i do think—as i said just now—that restoring price stability is just something that we have to do. there, there isn’t an option to fail to do that because that is the thing that enables you to have a strong labor market over time. without restoring price stability, you won’t be able, over the medium and longer term, to actually have a strong—a sustained period of very strong labor market conditions. so, of course, we serve both sides of the dual mandate, but we actually see them as well aligned on this. howard schneider. but as a—as a follow-on to that, given the uncertainty and that sort of paradoxical flow of data you’ve been getting, if you’re going to make a mistake, would you rather make the mistake on doing too much, raising too much, than raising too little? chair powell. we’re trying not to make a mistake. let me put it this way: we do see that there are two-sided risks. there would be the risk of doing too much and, you know, imposing more of a downturn on the economy than, than was necessary, but the risk—the risk of doing too little and leaving the economy with this entrenched inflation, it only raises the cost. if  you fail to deal with it in the near term, it only raises the cost of, of dealing with it later to the extent people start to see it as just part of their economic lives. they start to factor high inflation into their decisions—when that—on a sustained basis. when that starts to really happen, and we don’t think that’s happened yet, but when that starts to happen, it just gets that much harder. and the pain will be that much greater. so i really do think that it’s important that we—that we address this now and get it done. michelle smith. neil. neil irwin. thanks, chair powell. neil irwin from axios. to build a little bit on what steve was asking, do you believe the united states is currently in a recession? will the gdp reading tomorrow affect that judgment one way or the other? and has your assessment of the risk of recession changed any in recent weeks? chair powell. so i don’t—i do not think the u.s. is currently in a recession. and the reason is, there are just too many areas of the economy that are—that are performing, you know, too well. and, of course, i would point to the labor market, in particular. as i mentioned, it’s true that growth is slowing for reasons that we understand. really, the growth was extraordinarily high last year, 5½ percent. we would have expected growth to slow. there’s also more slowing going on now. but if you look at the labor market, you’ve got growth—i think, payroll jobs averaging 450,000 per month. that’s a remarkably strong level for, for this state of, of affairs. the unemployment rate at near a 50-year low at 3.6 percent. all of the wage measures that we track are running very strong. so this is a very strong labor market, and it’s just not consistent with— you know, 2.7 million people hired in the first half of the year. it doesn’t make sense that the  economy would be in recession with, with this kind of thing happening. so i don’t think the u.s. economy’s in recession right now. neil irwin. gdp? gdp tomorrow? chair powell. ah, haven’t seen it, and, and we’ll just have to see what it says. i don’t—i mean, i would say, generally, the gdp numbers do have a tendency to be revised pretty significantly. it’s just—it’s just that it’s very hard—it’s very hard to cumulate [to an estimate of] u.s. gdp. it’s a large economy. and a lot of—a lot of work and judgment goes into that. but you tend to take first gdp reports, i think, with a—with a grain of salt. but, of course, it’s something we’ll be looking at. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. victoria guida with politico. i wanted to ask about the new conflict-of-interest rules that you all rolled out. some senators have written asking for those rules to have more teeth and to have sort of more transparency about fed’s financial—the fed officials’ financial activity. i was wondering if you could speak to that and whether you intend on, you know, toughening those rules in any way. chair powell. so those are—those are the toughest rules in place, you know, at any comparable institution that i’m aware of. we think—you know, we’ve thought about this carefully, and we put them in place. and we’re building the infrastructure so that—so that, you know, the enforcement will be tight, that, actually, you won’t be able to make trades unless they’re precleared. and the amount of trades you make, they’ll have to be 45 days or more before any fomc meeting. it’s just—i think we’ve really, you know, created a very strong and robust set of rules that will, you know, support public trust in the institution. and, again, we’re just now—the system is just now up and running. and i’m proud of what we did.  michelle smith. catarina. catarina saraiva. hi, chair powell. hi. catarina saraiva, bloomberg news. i wanted to ask a little bit more about the 75 basis points versus 50 versus 25. can you talk a little bit about what, what kind of goes into your thinking for, you know, making the decision on how much to raise rates and, you know, just talking about a very large amount that you alluded to? could that possibly be 100 basis points? and then, kind of along those lines, is there any sort of weakness in the economy, outside of inflation measures, that would lead you to slow your hiking pace? chair powell. so i’m going to—i’m going to take that as a question about the next meeting and thereafter. so, as i mentioned, we’re going to be looking at all of those things: activity, labor market, inflation. and we’re going to be thinking about our policy stance and where does it really need to be. and i also mentioned that, as this process—now that we’re at neutral—as the process goes on, at some point, it will be appropriate to, to slow down. and we haven’t made a decision when that point is, but intuitively that makes sense, right? we’ve been front-end-loading these very large rate increases, and now we’re getting closer to where we need to be. so that’s how we’re thinking about it. and in terms of september, we’re going—we’re going to watch the data and the evolving outlook very carefully and factor in everything and make a decision in september about what to do. and i’m not really going to provide any specific guidance about what that might be. so, you know, but i mentioned that we might do another unusually large rate increase. but that’s not a decision that we’ve made at all. so we are—you know, we’re going to be guided by the data. and i think you can still think of the, the destination as broadly in line with the september—sorry, the june sep, because  it’s only six weeks old. and sometimes, sometimes seps can get old really quick. i think in this one—this one i would say is probably, probably the best guide we have as to where the committee thinks it needs to get at the end of the year and then into next year. so i would point you to that. michelle smith. chris. christopher rugaber. hi. thank you. chris rugaber, associated press. i wanted to ask about right now, there’s a sort of growing gap between the fed’s preferred measure of inflation, the pce, pce index, and the one that’s followed by the public, the cpi, of course. how do you expect to handle this divergence if the pce starts to come down enough for you to consider slowing rate hikes, even if the public is still seeing much higher cpi ratings? thank you. chair powell. so it’s an interesting, interesting situation. of course, we’ve, we’ve long used pce because we think it’s just better at capturing the inflation that people actually face in their lives. and i think that that view is pretty widely understood. that said, the public really reads about cpi. and the difference really is because the cpi has higher weights on things like food, gasoline, motor vehicles, and housing than the pce index does. and so that accounts for a lot of the difference. however, over time, they tend to come together. you know, we—given the importance in the public eye of cpi, we are calling it out and noticing it and everything like that. but remember, we do target pce. that is because we think it’s a better measure. they will come together eventually. the typical gap was really about 25 basis points for a very long time. and if it went—if it got to 40 basis points, that would be very noticeable. and now it’s—now it’s much larger than that because of the things i  mentioned. so we’ll be watching both, but, again, the one that we think is the best measure always has been pce, at least since i think we—some 20 plus years ago—moved to pce. michelle smith. michael mckee. michael mckee. i’d like to weave a couple of things together, mr. chairman. michael mckee from bloomberg tv and radio. you said that the destination pretty much remains the same in terms of your end-of-the-year target. but where are you in the journey? we’ve now seen the federal stimulus programs end. you mentioned consumer spending, business investment have slowed. are they moving at a pace you would expect? or is demand still greater than supply—too much greater than supply that you need to do significantly more? and i ask because there are lags in the impact of monetary policy, as you mentioned. and a lot of this might hit in 2023. the strong dollar effect may hit in 2023, when the economy might be weak. how, how do you know where you are and where you think you need to get to? chair powell. well, just talking about demand for a second: as i mentioned in my remarks, i think you pretty clearly do see a slowing now in demand in the second quarter— consumer spending, business fixed investment, housing, places like that. i think, you know, people widely looked at the first-quarter numbers and thought they didn’t make sense and might have been misleading in terms of the overall direction of the economy—[that was] not, not true of the second quarter. but at the same time, you have this labor market. so there are plenty of experiences where gdp has been reported as weak and the labor market as strong. and the economy has gone right through that and been fine. so that—that’s happened many times. and it used to happen—if you remember, in the first quarter of every year, for several years in a row, gdp was negative, and the labor market was moving on just  fine. and it turned out to just be measurement error. it was called residual seasonality. we don’t know the situation. the truth is, though, we, we think that demand is moderating. we do. how much is it moderating? we’re not sure. we’re going to have to watch the data carefully. there are—there is a great deal of money on people’s balance sheets that they can spend. the unemployment rate is very low. the labor market’s very hot. there are many, many job openings. wages are high. so it’s the kind of thing where you think that the—that the economy should actually be, be doing pretty well in the second half of the year. but we’ll have to see. we don’t know that because you do see a marked slowing in the second quarter that does—that is fairly broad. so we’ll be watching that. we’ll be watching that. of course, as i mentioned, we do want to see demand running below potential for a sustained period to create slack and, and give inflation a chance to come down. michelle smith. nicole. nicole goodkind. hi, thank you, chairman. nicole goodkind, cnn business. when does the committee expect to see a meaningful slowdown in the labor market? and how much weakness will it accept with regard to slower job growth and higher unemployment before it pauses or begins to think about cutting rates? chair powell. so i think you’re already seeing—you’ve seen, in the labor market, what you’ve seen is a decline from very high levels of job creation last year and earlier this year to modestly slower job creation—still, still quite robust, as i mentioned. so you’re seeing that. you’re seeing some increase—some increase in initial claims from insurance, although that may actually have to do with seasonal adjustments. we’re not sure that that’s actually real.  there’s some evidence that wages—if you look at average hourly earnings, they appear to be moderating, not so yet from the other wage measures. and we’ll be getting the employment compensation index measurement, i think, on friday, i guess. and that’s a very important one because it adjusts for compensation—composition. so i’d say you—and also, anecdotally, you hear much—the sort of level of concern on the part of businesses that they simply can’t find workers is probably down a little bit from what it was, say, for example, late in the latter parts of last year. so there’s a feeling that the labor market is moving back into balance. if you look at—if you look at job openings or quits, you see them moving sideways or perhaps a little bit down. but it’s only the beginning of an adjustment. but i think most—also, if you look at—i mean, once you start citing these things, you can’t stop. if you look at the household survey, you see much lower job creation, and the household survey can be quite volatile, but it has no jobs created in the last three months. so that might be a signal that job creation’s actually a little bit slower than we’re seeing in the—in the establishment survey. so executive summary [is]: i would say there’s some evidence that labor demand may be slowing a bit—labor supply, not so much. we have been disappointed that labor force participation really hasn’t moved up since january. that may be related to yet another big wave of covid. and there’s evidence that that’s the case. but—so we’re not seeing much in the way of labor supply. nonetheless, i would say some, some progress on demand and supply getting back in alignment. nicole goodkind. and then how much weakness would you be willing to accept before you think about pausing rate cuts? chair powell. so i think we’re looking—we’re going to be looking at, at inflation as well. you know, as i mentioned, we need to see inflation coming down. we need to be  confident that inflation is going to get back down to mandate-consistent levels. that’s not something we can avoid doing. that really needs to happen. and, but we do think, though, that the labor market can adjust because of the huge overhang of job openings, of excess demand, really. there should be able to be an adjustment that would have lower than—perhaps lower-than-expected increases in unemployment—lower than would be expected in the ordinary course of events because the level—the ratio of, of vacancies to unemployed is just out of keeping with historical experience. and that suggests that this time could be different. michelle smith. edward lawrence. edward lawrence. thanks, mr. chairman. edward lawrence from fox business. so you said that the path may be narrowed to avoiding a recession. so how, how close are we to a recession? and then how do forecasts of possible recession from banks and economists, how does that make a soft landing you’ve talked about more difficult? chair powell. so as, as i mentioned, it doesn’t seem that the u.s. economy is in recession right now. and i think you do see weakening, some slowdown—let’s put it that way— in growth. and you see it across some of the categories that i mentioned. but there’s also just the very strong data coming out of the labor market, still. so, overall, you would say that, in all probability, demand is still strong, and, and the economy is still on track to continue to grow this year. but the slowdown in the second quarter is notable. and we’re—you know, we’re going to be watching that carefully. sorry, what was the— edward lawrence. forecasts. you know, how do bank forecasts of possible recessions, economists, does that affect the soft landing?  chair powell. well, you know, we’ve said since the beginning, i think, that, that having a soft landing is what we’re aiming for. of course, that has to be our goal. it is our goal. and we’ll keep trying to achieve it. i think—i do think events—at the beginning, we said it was not going to be easy. it was going to be quite challenging to do that. it’s unusual. it’s an unusual event. it’s not a typical event, given where we are. if there is a path to it, and we think there is, it is the one i mentioned, that the labor market actually is—has such a large amount of surplus demand that you could see—you could see that demand coming down in a way that didn’t translate into a big increase in unemployment as you would expect in the ordinary course because, frankly, the imbalance is so much greater. and, but we don’t know that. i mean, this is a—this is a case of first impression. so anyone who is really sure that it’s impossible or really sure that it will happen is probably underestimating the level of uncertainty. and so i would certainly say it’s an uncertain, uncertain thing. nonetheless, it’s our goal to achieve it, and we’ll keep trying to do that. michelle smith. jean. jean yung. thank you, mr. chairman. jean yung with market news. i wanted to ask about the balance sheet reduction program. it’s been working for a couple months now and in a different environment than the last time the fed did it. what are you learning about how it’s working and how markets are reacting? and is reaching the minimum level of reserves needed in the system still several years away at the current pace? chair powell. so we think it’s working fine. as you know, we, we tapered up into it. and, and in september, we’ll go to full strength. and the markets seem to have accepted it. by all assessments, the markets should be able to absorb this. and we expect that’ll be the case.  so i would say the plan is broadly on track. it’s a little bit slow to get going because some of these trades don’t settle until—for a bit of time. but it’ll be picking up steam. so i guess your second question was getting—the process of getting back down to the new equilibrium will take a while. and that time, it’s hard to be precise, but, you know, the model would suggest that it could be between two, two and a half years, that kind of thing. and this is a much faster pace than the last time. balance sheet’s much, much bigger than it was. but we looked at this carefully, and we thought that this, this was the sensible pace. and we have no reason to think it’s not. michelle smith. brian. brian cheung. hi, chairman powell. brian cheung, yahoo finance. looking at financial conditions, it seems like the tightening has slowed as of late with the 10 year coming down, 30-year fixed mortgage rates also going a bit sideways, when we talk about a hot housing market still. just wondering if you find financial conditions tight enough, especially as you continue to raise rates. chair powell. so a big piece of that is inflation expectations—you know, breakevens coming down, which, you know, is a good thing. it’s a good thing that markets do seem to have confidence in, in the committee’s commitment to getting inflation back down to 2 percent. so we like to see market-based, you know, readings of inflation expectations come down. you know, broader financial conditions have tightened, tightened a good bit. i mean, the way this works is we, we set our policy, and financial conditions react, and then financial conditions are what affects the economy. and we don’t control that second step. we’re just going to do what we think needs to be done. we’re going to—we’re going to get our policy rate to a level where we’re confident that  inflation will be moving back down to 2 percent. confident. so that’s how we’re going to take it. and, of course, we’ll be watching financial conditions to see that they are appropriately tight and that they’re having the effect that we would hope they’re having, which is to see demand moderate and inflationary pressures recede and, ultimately, inflation come down. michelle smith. greg. greg robb. thank you, chair powell. greg robb from marketwatch. i wonder if you can go back a little bit in time to before there was this outbreak of inflation, when the committee put in place forward guidance on tapering asset purchases. i think it was december 2020. there’s a recent speech by fed governor waller talking about that and saying that maybe that was too tight, that kind of condition, and it put you a little bit behind—not his words but maybe, you know, were kind of late to react to some of that inflation. so could you talk about that decision, and have you looked at it in hindsight at all? thank you. chair powell. so, yes, we said that we wouldn’t lift off until we had basically achieved our dual-mandate goals. and the reason we did it in real time was that, the first look at the new framework that we’d rolled out, plenty of people were saying, “it’s not credible. you’ll never get inflation to 2 percent.” some of our critics now who say inflation’s too tight—too high were the same ones who were saying, “you’ll never get to 2 percent.” well, but anyway, that’s what happened. so we, we thought we needed to really make a strong statement with that. it wasn’t part of the framework. the december ’20 guidance was not part of our overall new framework. it was just guidance that we put in place. so i would say two things. one, i don’t think that that has materially changed the situation. but i have to admit, i don’t think i would do that again. i don’t think i would do that again. we—you know, ultimately, the situation evolved in a highly  unexpected way for all of us. and, you know, maybe the learning is that leave a little more flexibility than that. but did it matter in the end? you know, we—if you look at—i really don’t think it did. i’m not sure it would’ve mattered if we’d been raising rates three months earlier. does anybody think that would’ve made a big difference? i mean, lots of central banks were raising rates three months earlier, and it didn’t matter. i mean, this is a—this is a global phenomenon that’s happening now—admittedly, different in the united states, but anyway. michelle smith. nancy. greg robb. can i follow up? michelle smith. sorry about that, greg. greg robb. just a lot of people talk about that time, and they talk about a taper tantrum. i know you haven’t talked about it too much but that you were worried at the time about repeating that taper tantrum that you had experienced as a governor. so was that part of that? where did that fit into all those decisions? thank you. chair powell. so i think we learned—there’ve been multiple taper tantrums, right? so there was the famous one in 2013. there’s what happened at the december ’18 meeting, where, you know, markets can ignore developments around the balance sheet for years on end and then suddenly react very sharply. so we just had developed a practice of moving predictably and doing it in steps and things like that. it was just like that’s how we did it. and so we did it that way this time. we were—we were careful to, to take steps and communicate and all that kind of thing. yes, we were trying to avoid a tantrum because they can be quite destructive. they can tighten financial conditions and knock the economy off kilter. and, you know, when it happens, you have to—really, in both ’13 and ’18, it really had consequences for the real  economy, you know, two, three, four months later. so we were trying to avoid that. that was part of it. again, i don’t think that’s—the real issue of 2020 and ’21 was just trying to understand what was happening with the reopening economy. that, that was where the big uncertainty was. and, you know, our view was that these supply-side issues would get better: that people would go back to work, that labor force participation would come back, everyone would get vaccinated, schools would open, kids would be in school, and labor force participation would jump back up. that’s what we were—that was very broadly thought to be the case: these supply-side issues would get solved reasonably quickly. and they just haven’t. they still haven’t. so that’s really the learning, i think, is around how complicated these supply-side issues can be. we haven’t seen this before in a long, long time. and so that’s really, you know, what accounts for the pace at which we moved, and we did. when inflation changed direction, really, in october, we’ve moved quickly since then. i think people would agree. but before then, inflation was coming down month by month. and, you know, we kind of thought we had the story—probably had the story right. but then, i think in october, you started to see a range of data that said “no. this is a much stronger economy and much higher inflation than we’ve been thinking.” and, again, we’ve pivoted, and here we are. greg robb. thanks. michelle smith. nancy. nancy marshall-genzer. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. chair powell, i just want to pin you down a little bit more on the issue of recession. so if we get a negative gdp number tomorrow for the second quarter, would the fed consider the u.s. in a recession? and just remind us, what is your definition for the start of a recession?  chair powell. so the fed doesn’t make a—doesn’t make a judgment on that. you know, we’re focused on the dual mandate and using our tools to achieve maximum employment and price stability. we don’t—we don’t say “there is now a recession” and that kind of thing. so that wouldn’t be something we’d do. we would look at the data tomorrow—and no doubt, we’ll look at it very carefully—and draw whatever implications we can. as i mentioned, though, you know, if you think about what an inflation—sorry, what a recession really is, it’s a broad-based decline across many industries that, you know, is sustained for more than a couple of months, and there are a bunch of specific tests in it. and it just doesn’t—this just doesn’t seem like that now. what we have right now doesn’t seem like that. and the real reason is that the labor market is just sending such a signal of economic strength that it makes you really question the gdp data. but, again, that’s not a decision that we—that we make. and we won’t—we won’t reach a conclusion one way or another on that. michelle smith. simon. simon rabinovitch. thank you very much. simon rabinovitch with the economist. you said that some softening in the labor market is needed. within the fed, there are staff economists who’ve argued that nairu, the noninflationary rate of unemployment, might be as high as 5 to 6 percent right now, which obviously is a lot higher than the current rate of 3.6. what’s your assessment of nairu? is that something that came up in discussion with the committee? chair powell. so i think, broadly, a lot of economists think that the—that the natural rate of unemployment will have moved up to some significant extent above where we think it was before. and the reason is there’s—it’s the usual matching issue, where matching has become less effective, and that kind of thing when you have the kind of turbulent downturn and  the big switches in demand from services to goods and all that. so it could be higher. and my own instinct is that the natural rate of unemployment is higher. of course, i would add that we don’t know it. we can never know where these star variables are in real time with any confidence. but i would say it must have moved up materially. but the other side of that is, as all these jobs get created and people go back to work and unemployment is so low, i think you could, in principle, you could see it coming back down pretty significantly. and that would also, by the way, take pressure off of inflation because it’s that gap—it’s the gap between actual unemployment and the—and the natural rate that really is relevant for, you know, the negative slack we have in the economy with the overtight labor market. so if you were to—you wouldn’t observe this. it’s an unobservable, but you could actually be seeing inflationary pressures coming down if that does happen. and we don’t—we don’t control that. but that’s something that, logically, if the pandemic and the disorder in the labor market caused the natural rate to move up, then as the labor market settles down, in principle, you should see it move back down. michelle smith. jeff. jeff cox. thank you, chair powell. jeff cox from cnbc.com. just a question about—hate to keep banging the drum about recession. but most of the polls that we’re seeing now from the public, people believe that we’re already in a recession or heading for one— economists, pretty much the same thing. they’re being told by folks like you and the administration that we’re not in a recession, we’re not heading for a recession—frankly, coming from the same people who told them inflation was transitory, telling them now that we’re not heading for a recession. so what would you tell the public to reassure them now that you feel  confident in your forecast going forward and the fed is ready to respond to a—to a potential downturn in the economy? chair powell. no, all i’ve really said is i don’t think it’s likely that the u.s. economy’s in a recession now. and i’ve explained why that is the case. it’s, it’s because you do see a very strong labor market. and i think the public will see that as well. you know, going forward, what we’ve seen is a—is a slowing in spending, as i mentioned. we’ve seen the very beginnings of perhaps a slight lessening in the—in the tightness of the labor market, but it would only be the beginnings. so, and i mentioned that, that—i also said that our goal is to bring inflation down and have a so-called soft landing, by which i mean a landing that doesn’t require a significant increase, a really significant increase in unemployment. we’re trying to achieve that. i have said, on many occasions, that we understand that’s going to be quite challenging and that it’s got more challenging over recent months. michelle smith. kyle. kyle campbell. thanks, chair powell. kyle campbell with american banker. the fomc has historically tried to avoid the kind of rapid monetary policy tightening that has happened so far this year. how concerned are you that the rate hikes that we’ve seen thus far might increase risks to financial stability not just domestically, but globally? chair powell. i mean, there are precedents for the fomc moving very quickly— for example, in 1994, and in 1980, even more so. so we’ve been known to do that when it’s the appropriate thing to do. and this year, it clearly is. i would say that, given how quickly we’ve moved, i’m gratified that while—that, basically, markets have been working. they’ve been orderly. there’s been some volatility, but that’s only to be expected.  for a financial stability perspective, you know, asset values are down, which in some—in some sense lowers vulnerabilities. it’s when they’re really high that you would worry that they’re—that they’re vulnerable to a fall, actually. many asset values have come down. i think you’ve got a well-capitalized banking system. i think you have—households are generally in about as strong as financial shape as they’ve been in a very long time or perhaps ever given the money that’s on people’s balance sheets. so you have a pretty—from a financial stability standpoint, you have a pretty decent picture. now, the macroeconomic, there are plenty of macroeconomic issues that don’t rise to the level of financial stability concerns. by financial stability, you know, we think of that as things that might undermine the working of the financial system, so big, serious things. that’s not to say that people at the lower end of the income spectrum aren’t, aren’t suffering, because they are. they’re suffering from high inflation. they’re going to the—to the grocery store and finding that, in many cases, their paycheck doesn’t cover the food they’re accustomed to buying. we’re seeing actual, you know, real declines in food consumption. and, you know, it’s very concerning. it’s very unfortunate. and that’s why we’re—we’re really committed to bringing down inflation—one of the reasons. michelle smith. let’s go to mark for the last question. mark hamrick. thank you, mr. chairman. mark hamrick with bankrate. i can remember when you held your first news conference, and you vowed to be a very plainspoken chairman, and we’re thinking today about the impacts of fed policy on individuals as well. what would you say to individuals or households who may yet lose their jobs in this tightening cycle in the fight against inflation as they try to translate what fed policy means to them in this complicated economic landscape? thank you.  chair powell. so i guess the first thing i would say to, to every household is that we know that inflation is too high. we understand how painful it is, particularly for people who are living paycheck to paycheck and spend most of that paycheck on necessities, such as food and gas and heating their homes and clothing and things like that. we do understand that, that those people suffer the most. middle-class and better-off people have some resources, where they can absorb these things. but people, many people, don’t have those resources. so, you know, we—it is our job. it is our institutional role. we are assigned uniquely and unconditionally the obligation of, of providing price stability to the american people. and we’re going to use our tools to do that. as i mentioned, there will be some, in all likelihood, some softening in labor market conditions. we need growth to slow to below potential growth. we don’t want to—we don’t want this to be bigger than it needs to be. but, ultimately, if you think about the medium and longer term, price stability is the thing that, that makes the whole economy work. it’s what can—it can give us a strong labor market and wages that aren’t being eaten up by high inflation. if you talk to people—again, people who are making, you know, wages, relatively low wages— they’re the ones who are suffering the most from inflation. so it’s all the more reason why we need to move, move on this. thank you very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 2  page 2 federal open market committee patrick e. mccabe and norman j. morin, deputy associate directors, division of research and statistics, board david arseneau, assistant director, division of financial stability, board; giovanni favara and etienne gagnon, assistant directors, division of monetary affairs, board penelope a. beattie, 4 section chief, office of the secretary, board; valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board alyssa arute,3 manager, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board sriya l. anbil, 5 group manager, division of monetary affairs, board fabian winkler, principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board peter m. garavuso, senior information manager, division of monetary affairs, board david na and anthony sarver, senior financial institution and policy analysts, division of monetary affairs, board brett takacs, senior communications analyst, division of information technology, board becky c. bareford, first vice president, federal reserve bank of richmond kartik b. athreya, michael dotsey, and michelle m. neal, executive vice presidents, federal reserve banks of richmond, philadelphia, and new york, respectively james p. bergin, spencer krane, and giovanni olivei, senior vice presidents, federal reserve banks of new york, chicago, and boston, respectively william d. dupor, vice president, federal reserve bank of st. louis james f. dolmas, economic policy advisor and senior economist, federal reserve bank of dallas nina boyarchenko, department head, federal reserve bank of new york jonathan heathcote, monetary advisor, federal reserve bank of minneapolis federico mandelman, research economist and advisor, federal reserve bank of atlanta developments in financial markets and open market operations the deputy manager turned first to a discussion of financial market developments. financial markets over the intermeeting period reflected elevated uncertainty about the outlook. most market participants appeared to view a moderation of inflation and slower, but still positive, economic growth ahead as the most likely scenario. however, investors appeared to be increasingly attentive to downside risks to the economy in light of the potential for shocks from abroad and the continued upside surprises to inflation. on net, financial conditions eased modestly over the period but remained substantially tighter than at the start of the year. treasury yields fell, reflecting expectations of slower growth as well as a decline in inflation compensation. respondents to the open market desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants marked down their growth forecasts for 2022 and 2023 and attached higher odds than in the june survey to the possibility that the u.s. economy could enter a recession in coming quarters. market participants perceived falling commodity prices—particularly for oil—and the fomc’s commitment to bringing inflation down as pointing to lower inflation ahead. market-based measures of near-dated inflation compensation declined and continued to suggest that inflation would ease in coming quarters. in the desk surveys, respondents also expected inflation to decline substantially in 2023 but assigned meaningful probabilities to a wide range of potential outcomes, including scenarios involving continued elevated rates of inflation. far-forward market-based measures of inflation com- andrew foerster, senior research advisor, federal reserve bank of san francisco 4 attended tuesday’s session only. attended from the discussion of the economic and financial situation through the end of wednesday’s session. 5  minutes of the meeting of july 26–27, 2022 page 3 pensation fell over the period. these measures continued to suggest that inflation would return over time to the committee’s 2 percent objective. in their assessment of the policy outlook, market participants expected significant policy tightening in coming meetings as the committee continued to respond to the current elevated level of inflation. nearly all respondents to the desk survey anticipated a 75 basis point increase in the target range at the current meeting, and most expected a 50 basis point increase in september to follow. the market-implied path of the federal funds rate indicated a peak policy rate of around 3.4 percent, significantly lower than at the time of the june meeting. the market-implied path suggested expectations that the policy rate would fall thereafter. most respondents to the desk survey expected the federal funds rate to remain above the survey’s longer-run policy rate of 2.4 percent through the end of 2024, but, on average, respondents placed significant probabilities on lower rate outcomes. regarding developments abroad, central banks in advanced foreign economies (afes) had quickened the pace of policy tightening in order to address above-target inflation. eight advanced-economy central banks raised their policy rates over the period. along lines similar to u.s. developments, market-implied policy rates in most afes fell at longer horizons and reflected expectations that policy rates would reach peak levels by early 2023. in contrast to central banks in other advanced economies, the bank of japan confirmed its commitment to accommodative policy. in this environment, the exchange value of the dollar appreciated further, surpassing its march 2020 peak against advanced-economy currencies. the deputy manager next turned to a discussion of money markets and desk operations. the 75 basis point increase in the target range at the june meeting passed through fully to the federal funds rate and other overnight rates. although downward pressure on overnight secured rates had persisted, the pronounced softness observed in the past intermeeting period had abated to some degree. the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility continued to support policy implementation, and balances remained elevated. the deputy manager anticipated that, in the near term, the evolution of take-up at the on rrp facility would continue to depend on changes in the supply of safe, short-term investments, and the demand for such investments by money market mutual funds (mmmfs). on rrp balances were expected to decline over time as balance sheet runoff proceeded. the deputy manager noted that this process would involve adjustments across a number of markets and that the staff would continue to monitor developments in money markets closely. regarding expectations for the evolution of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, market participants expected the committee to increase the monthly caps on system open market account (soma) redemptions beginning in september, as announced in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet issued in may. treasury coupon principal payments would first fall below the $60 billion cap in september, with the remainder of redemptions met with maturities of treasury bills. paydowns of agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) were projected to fall below the higher september cap of $35 billion beginning in september. the deputy manager ended with an update on soma net income. staff projections suggested that net income would likely turn negative in coming months. that development would be reflected in a temporary deferred asset on reserve bank balance sheets. any deferred asset would not affect the committee’s ability to implement monetary policy, and the deferred asset would be extinguished over time as net income turned positive again in later years. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the july 26–27 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) had declined over the first half of the year. however, the labor market continued to be very tight, and labor demand remained strong. consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—remained elevated in may, and available information suggested that inflation was still elevated in june. total nonfarm payroll employment posted a solid gain in june at a pace that was similar to that seen in april and may. the unemployment rate was unchanged in june at 3.6 percent. the unemployment rate for african americans moved lower in june, while the rate for hispanics was unchanged; both rates were noticeably higher than the national average. the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio both ticked  page 4 federal open market committee down in june. the private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, declined further in may but remained at a high level. nominal wage growth continued to be rapid and broad based, with average hourly earnings having risen 5.1 percent over the 12 months ending in june. real goods exports edged down in may after growing robustly in march and april. real goods imports continued to step down from the exceptionally strong march readings, driven by declines in imports of consumer goods and capital goods. exports and imports of services continued to be held back by an incomplete recovery of international travel. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit narrowed for a second consecutive month in may from its record size in march. the available data suggest that net exports contributed positively to gdp growth in the second quarter. consumer price inflation remained elevated. total pce price inflation was 6.3 percent over the 12 months ending in may, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.7 percent over the same period. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 4.0 percent in may, 2.1 percentage points higher than its year-earlier rate of increase. in june, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 9.1 percent, while core cpi inflation was 5.9 percent over the same period. survey-based measures of shortrun inflation expectations remained elevated; by contrast, some measures of longer-term inflation expectations moved lower in recent weeks. available indicators suggested that real pce rose at a modest pace in the second quarter, while business investment, residential investment, and government purchases all posted declines. manufacturing output moved lower in may and june, and forward-looking indicators of manufacturing activity weakened broadly. foreign economic growth slowed notably in the second quarter, as covid-19-related lockdowns led to a sharp contraction in china and russia’s war against ukraine took a toll on foreign activity, especially in europe. indicators for june showed the chinese economy rebounding as the lockdowns were eased. the global economy, however, continued to face headwinds from disruptions to the supply of energy, elevated political uncertainties in europe, and tighter global monetary and financial conditions. although most commodity prices moved lower from elevated levels in recent weeks, foreign consumer price inflation continued to rise through june, mostly reflecting past increases in energy and food prices, but also a continued broadening of price pressures to core goods and services. many foreign central banks tightened monetary policy to address high inflation. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, nominal and real treasury yields declined significantly, reportedly reflecting increased investor concerns about downside risks to the growth outlook as well as a decline in inflation compensation. sovereign yields in afes declined notably. the market-implied federal funds rate path for the next few meetings rose but moved down noticeably at longer horizons. broad equity price indexes were higher, on net, while credit spreads widened. major foreign equity price indexes edged higher, on net, and the exchange value of the dollar continued to appreciate. amid the decline in treasury yields, longer-term borrowing costs declined for households and businesses with higher credit ratings, and while credit availability remained generally available, it appeared to tighten for most businesses and some households. broad equity price indexes were higher over the intermeeting period, amid heightened volatility. declines in interest rates likely supported stock prices over the period, while some positive earnings releases suggested to investors a less pessimistic corporate outlook. onemonth option-implied volatility on the s&p 500 index— the vix—decreased but remained significantly above its pre-pandemic levels. yields on corporate bonds declined notably across the credit spectrum, but corporate bond spreads ended the period slightly wider. spreads on municipal bonds widened slightly as yields declined by less than those of comparable-maturity treasury securities. conditions in short-term funding markets were stable since the previous fomc meeting, with the june increase in the federal reserve’s administered rates passing through promptly to overnight money markets. secured overnight rates remained soft relative to the on rrp offering rate, with the downward pressure on rates attributed to continuing declines in net treasury bill issuance, elevated demand for collateral in the form of treasury securities, and mmmfs maintaining very short portfolio maturities amid uncertainty about the nearterm outlook for policy rate increases. consistent with the downward pressure on repo rates, daily take-up in the on rrp facility increased. spreads on lower-rated short-term commercial paper (cp) narrowed modestly, on net. bank core deposit rates moved up very little in  minutes of the meeting of july 26–27, 2022 page 5 response to the federal reserve’s increase in administered rates following the june fomc meeting, while mmmfs’ net yields rose, reflecting the increases in short-term rates over recent months. investors’ concerns about global economic growth intensified amid weaker-than-expected data on economic activity and uncertainty about the supply of natural gas from russia to europe. sovereign yields and mediumterm inflation compensation measures in major afes, most notably in the euro area, moved down, with yields largely reversing the sharp increase that occurred just before the june fomc meeting. in the euro area, peripheral sovereign spreads were little changed following the widely anticipated announcement by the european central bank of its transmission protection instrument that could be activated to counter disorderly conditions in euro-area bond markets. major foreign equity price indexes were volatile but generally edged higher, on net, supported by declines in sovereign yields. the dollar appreciated somewhat further against most currencies and particularly against the euro as yield differentials between the united states and the euro area widened. most latin american currencies depreciated against the dollar, in part reflecting the decline in global commodity prices. in domestic credit markets, longer-term borrowing costs for households and businesses with higher credit ratings declined over the intermeeting period but borrowing costs for lower rated firms were higher, on net. the credit quality of businesses, municipalities, and households remained stable. credit remained generally available, though credit availability appeared to tighten for most businesses and for some households. borrowing costs linked to shorter-term interest rates generally increased, largely as a result of expectations of tighter monetary policy. bank interest rates for both commercial and industrial (c&i) and commercial real estate (cre) loans increased in may and were close to prepandemic levels. yields on institutional leveraged loans and newly issued commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) increased amid financial market volatility and growing concerns about an economic slowdown. small businesses that borrow on a regular basis faced notably higher borrowing costs in june. interest rates on most existing credit card accounts and on auto loans continued to trend upward. in contrast to many other borrowing rates, residential mortgage rates fell since the june fomc meeting, in line with the drop in longerterm yields, but remained near their highest levels since 2010. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained strong with low volumes of defaults on corporate bonds in may and on leveraged loans in june. the volume of rating downgrades on speculative-grade credit in the corporate bond market was similar to that of upgrades in june, while for leveraged loans, the volume of downgrades exceeded the volume of upgrades in may and june. the credit quality for c&i and cre loans on banks’ books remained sound. however, respondents in the july senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos) indicated increased concerns about credit quality in the near future as reasons for their expectation of a tightening in lending standards over the second half of 2022. delinquency rates on cre loans in cmbs declined in june, delinquency rates on small business loans were little changed, and the credit quality of municipal securities remained strong. the credit quality of households stayed solid. residential mortgage delinquencies and the share of mortgages in forbearance trended down. credit card and auto credit delinquency rates rose somewhat over the first quarter but remained subdued by recent historical standards. business loans at banks expanded at a rapid pace in may and june, despite higher interest rates and a more uncertain economic outlook. c&i loans on banks’ books continued to grow robustly, with the july sloos citing reasons of increased demand by customers to finance inventory and accounts receivable. however, issuance of both agency and non-agency cmbs slowed significantly in june. credit appeared to be available to most small businesses, although the share of small firms reporting that it was difficult to obtain loans increased. credit in the residential mortgage market remained widely available for borrowers with higher credit ratings but tight for households with low credit scores. volumes of homepurchase mortgage originations declined in may and mortgage refinance volumes continued to fall. consumer credit remained broadly available to households in april and may but respondents in the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations indicated that it was harder to get credit in recent months. that said, auto loans outstanding continued to grow at a robust pace in april and may but credit card balances moderated somewhat in may and june. the staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, characterized the vulnerabilities of the u.s. financial system as moderate, down from notable in january. equity and corporate debt prices declined significantly since the last assessment, reflecting concerns over slower  page 6 federal open market committee growth and lower risk appetite in corporate markets. declining risk appetite has also led to sharp declines in the price of some digital assets. the staff noted that digital assets tended to be volatile. the staff also highlighted the financial stability considerations associated with rapid growth in stablecoins, including their vulnerability to runs and the opacity of many aspects of their operations. residential real estate prices continued to rise, and the staff noted that although valuations have been elevated, mortgage underwriting standards have been stronger than in previous house-price cycles. cre prices continued to rise, and valuation pressures appeared to be increasing. staff economic outlook the projection for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the july fomc meeting was noticeably weaker than the june forecast, reflecting the economy’s reduced momentum and current and prospective financial conditions that were expected to provide less support to aggregate demand growth. as a result, while the projected level of real gdp remained above potential this year, the gap was expected to have closed by the second half of 2023. similarly, the unemployment rate was projected to start rising in the second half of 2022 and to reach the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at the end of next year. the staff assessed that households were in a better position than in the mid-2000s to weather a downturn in house prices, noting that mortgage debt growth has significantly lagged growth in house prices, leaving households with substantial equity cushions. moreover, for much of the past decade, most new mortgage debt had been added by borrowers with prime credit scores. in addition, the staff assessed that business leverage was high, but businesses maintained ample cash on hand and their credit quality remained strong. further, the ability of most firms to service their debt was at a historically high level, as measured by the interest coverage ratio. total pce price inflation was expected to be 4.8 percent in 2022, and core inflation was expected to be 4.0 percent. core pce price inflation was expected to step down to 2.6 percent in 2023 and to 2.0 percent in 2024; the projected deceleration in core prices was attributable to the anticipated resolution of supply–demand imbalances, a labor market that was expected to become less tight over the projection period, and a projected decline in import price inflation. total pce inflation was expected to decline to 2.2 percent in 2023 and to 1.9 percent in 2024, reflecting the anticipated slowing in core inflation and a projected rapid deceleration in consumer food and energy prices in coming quarters. the staff assessed that leverage in the financial sector remained moderate. recent declines in bank capital ratios were due to higher volatility, interest rate increases, and loan growth, but the recently concluded stress tests suggested that participating banks could absorb losses from a severe recession without breaching regulatory minimums, and some banks were expected to increase their capital ratios later this year. leverage at hedge funds and life insurance companies remained relatively high. market liquidity had deteriorated in the oil and equities markets since january, but market functioning continued to be orderly. yields offered by mmmfs were well above those offered by banks, and the staff noted that this yield differential would attract inflows to mmmfs. noting the structural vulnerabilities associated with mmmfs, the staff highlighted the need to monitor the size and fragility of this sector and the progress of the security and exchange commission’s recently proposed reforms. the staff noted that open-end bond and loan mutual funds, which are also vulnerable to large-scale investor withdrawals, had experienced outflows as interest rates rose. these outflows had proceeded in an orderly manner. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside, noting that supply chain bottlenecks, russia’s war against ukraine, weak incoming data on spending, and the tightening in financial conditions since the start of the year supported this assessment. the staff viewed the risks to the inflation projection as skewed to the upside given the persistent upward surprises seen in the inflation data, the possibility that inflation expectations would become unanchored as a result of the large increase in actual inflation over the past year, and the risk that supply conditions would not improve as much as the baseline projection assumed. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that recent indicators of spending and production had softened. nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. participants recognized that russia’s war against ukraine was causing tremendous human and  minutes of the meeting of july 26–27, 2022 page 7 economic hardship. participants judged that the war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. against this background, participants stated that they were highly attentive to inflation risks. house prices on home affordability. participants anticipated that this slowdown in housing activity would continue and also expected higher borrowing costs to lead to a slowing in other interest-sensitive household expenditures, such as purchases of durable goods. with regard to current economic activity, participants noted that consumer expenditures, housing activity, business investment, and manufacturing production had all decelerated from the robust rates of growth seen in 2021. the labor market, however, remained strong. participants observed that indicators of spending and production suggested that the second quarter of this year had seen a broad-based softening in economic activity. many participants remarked that some of the slowing, particularly in the housing sector, reflected the emerging response of aggregate demand to the tightening of financial conditions associated with the ongoing firming of monetary policy. the unwinding of the large-scale support to consumer spending provided by pandemic-related fiscal policy actions, the inflation-induced reduction in real disposable income, and the move down in the demand for some products from the elevated levels seen in earlier stages of the pandemic had also all led to slower growth in households’ expenditures. in addition, a deterioration in the foreign economic outlook and a strong dollar were contributing to a weakening of external demand. participants anticipated that u.s. real gdp would expand in the second half of the year, but many expected that growth in economic activity would be at a below-trend pace, as the period ahead would likely see the response of aggregate demand to tighter financial conditions become stronger and more broad based. participants noted that a period of below-trend gdp growth would help reduce inflationary pressures and set the stage for the sustained achievement of the committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability. with respect to the business sector, participants noted that investment spending had likely declined in the second quarter. in addition, business survey data and information received from contacts indicated that manufacturing orders and production had fallen in some districts. heightened uncertainty, concerns about inflation, tighter financial conditions, and a cutback in consumer spending had led firms to downgrade economic prospects. some participants noted that their contacts were reporting that businesses were in the process of reevaluating their capital expenditure plans, though a few participants stated that some contacts had reported a degree of short-term momentum in business activity arising from existing orders and from the implementation of expansion plans made before the tightening of financial conditions. a few participants indicated that some business contacts had assessed that demand and supply were beginning to come into better balance. even so, contacts in many areas continued to report major supply chain disruptions and anticipated that these were likely to continue while also indicating that there were signs of improvement in supply conditions in some areas. in their discussion of the household sector, participants commented that they were seeing many signs in the data, and hearing reports from business contacts, of slower growth in consumer spending. although the aggregate balance sheet for the household sector was strong and the unemployment rate was low, consumer sentiment had deteriorated, and households were reportedly becoming more cautious in their expenditure decisions in light of uncertainty about the economic outlook and the reduction in purchasing power induced by price rises, particularly increases in the prices of essentials such as food, housing, and transportation. participants also observed that housing activity had weakened notably, reflecting the impact of higher mortgage interest rates and participants observed that the labor market remained strong, with the unemployment rate very low, job vacancies and quits close to historically high levels, and an elevated rate of nominal wage growth. many participants also noted, however, that there were some tentative signs of a softening outlook for the labor market: these signs included increases in weekly initial unemployment insurance claims, reductions in quit rates and vacancies, slower growth in payrolls than earlier in the year, and reports of cutbacks in hiring in some sectors. in addition, although nominal wage growth remained strong according to a wide range of measures, there were some signs of a leveling off or edging down. in some districts, contacts had suggested that labor demand–supply imbalances might be diminishing, with firms being more successful in hiring and retaining workers and under less pressure to raise wages. some participants noted that the contribution that increases in labor supply could make to reducing labor market imbalances was likely limited, especially as the scope for labor force participation to pick up was constrained by the ongoing movement of the large baby-boom cohort into their retirement years, while others highlighted factors holding down participation that could wane in the future, such  page 8 federal open market committee as continuing pandemic-related concerns. participants observed that, in part because of tighter financial conditions and an associated moderation in the growth of aggregate demand, growth in employment would likely slow further in the period ahead. they noted that this development would help bring labor demand and supply into better balance, reducing upward pressures on nominal wage growth and aiding the return of inflation to 2 percent. several participants observed that the moderation in labor market conditions might well lag the slowdown in economic activity. participants remarked that a moderation in labor market conditions would likely involve a decline in the number of job openings as well as a moderate increase in unemployment from the current very low rate. a couple of participants indicated that firms were keen to retain workers—a factor that could limit the increase in layoffs associated with a slowing labor market. participants noted that indicators of spending and production pointed to less underlying strength in economic activity than was suggested by indicators of labor market activity. with employment growth still strong, the weakening in spending data implied unusually large negative readings on labor productivity growth for the year so far. participants remarked that the strength of the labor market suggested that economic activity may be stronger than implied by the current gdp data, with several participants raising the possibility that the discrepancy might ultimately be resolved by gdp being revised upward. several participants also observed, however, that the labor market might not be as tight as some indicators suggested, and they noted that data provided by the payroll processor adp and employment as reported in the household survey both seemed to imply a softer labor market than that suggested by the still-robust growth in payroll employment as reported in the establishment survey. participants observed that inflation remained unacceptably high and was well above the committee’s longerrun goal of 2 percent. in light of the high cpi reading for june, participants noted that pce inflation was likely to have increased further in that month. participants further observed that inflationary pressures were broad based, a pattern reflected in large one-month increases in the trimmed mean cpi and core cpi measures. participants remarked that, although recent declines in gasoline prices would likely help produce lower headline inflation rates in the short term, declines in the prices of oil and some other commodities could not be relied on as providing a basis for sustained lower inflation, as these prices could quickly rebound. participants also noted that the high cost of living was an especially great burden on low- and middle-income households. participants agreed that there was little evidence to date that inflation pressures were subsiding. they judged that inflation would respond to monetary policy tightening and the associated moderation in economic activity with a delay and would likely stay uncomfortably high for some time. participants also observed that in some product categories, the rate of price increase could well pick up further in the short run, with sizable additional increases in residential rental expenses being especially likely. participants noted that supply bottlenecks were continuing to contribute to price pressures. there were, however, some signs of gradual improvement in the supply situation—including improved availability of certain key materials, less upward pressure on input prices, and a decline in delivery times. contacts reported that there were nevertheless substantial continuing challenges. participants judged that it would take considerable time for supply constraints to be resolved, and a few suggested that full resolution of supply difficulties would take longer than they previously assessed. several participants stressed that improvements in supply would be helpful but by themselves could not be relied on to resolve the supply and demand imbalances in the economy sufficiently rapidly. participants emphasized that a slowing in aggregate demand would play an important role in reducing inflation pressures. they expected that the appropriate firming of monetary policy and an eventual easing of supply and demand imbalances would bring inflation back down to levels consistent with the committee’s longer-run objective and keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. participants discussed a number of factors likely to be helpful in bringing inflation back down to 2 percent. in addition to the committee’s ongoing policy firming and anchored longerterm inflation expectations, these included competitive pressures restraining price increases, the apparent absence of a wage–price spiral, the tightening of monetary policy abroad, and the impact of the appreciation of the dollar on import prices. however, they continued to view commodity price developments as a potential source of upward pressure on inflation. participants noted that expectations of inflation were an important influence on the behavior of actual inflation and stressed that moving to an appropriately restrictive stance of policy was essential for avoiding an unanchoring of inflation expectations. such an unanchoring would make achieving the committee’s statutory objectives of maximum employment and price stability much more difficult. in assessing the current state of inflation  minutes of the meeting of july 26–27, 2022 page 9 expectations, participants noted that recent readings on market-based measures of inflation compensation were consistent with longer-term inflation expectations remaining anchored near 2 percent. they judged that this behavior of longer-term inflation expectations was likely partly due to the actual and expected firming of monetary policy and also likely reflected downward revisions to the growth of aggregate demand expected in coming years. in addition, several participants assessed that the committee’s ongoing monetary policy tightening was helping alleviate concerns among market participants and wage and price setters that elevated inflation would become entrenched. several participants observed that recent readings on survey measures of inflation expectations were broadly consistent with the committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective, although a few participants noted that household surveys were indicating increasing divergences in views about the likely longer-run rate of inflation. in their discussion of risks, participants emphasized that they were highly attentive to inflation risks and were closely monitoring developments regarding both inflation and inflation expectations. uncertainty about the medium-term course of inflation remained high, and the balance of inflation risks remained skewed to the upside, with several participants highlighting the possibility of further supply shocks arising from commodity markets. participants saw the risks to the outlook for real gdp growth as primarily being to the downside. these downside risks included the possibility that the tightening in financial conditions would have a larger negative effect on economic activity than anticipated, that there would be further pandemic-related economic disruptions, or that geopolitical and global economic developments would lead to additional adverse economic or financial disturbances. several of the participants who commented on issues related to financial stability noted that, on balance, asset valuations had eased from elevated levels in recent months. high levels of capital and liquidity overall in the banking system, healthy household balance sheets, and the adoption of stronger mortgage underwriting standards following the global financial crisis were also cited among the factors that fostered financial stability in the current environment. several participants noted that financial market liquidity had been low in some areas but that market functioning had, nonetheless, been orderly. several participants emphasized the importance of avoiding complacency when assessing financial vulnerabilities amid ever-changing economic and financial landscapes or the need to look at a broad range of possible outcomes, including scenarios involving elevated inflation and rising interest rates, when assessing financial vulnerabilities and stability. some participants commented on the financial stability challenges posed by digital assets. they noted that these assets, including stablecoins, were subject to vulnerabilities—such as runs, fire sales, and excessive leverage—similar to those associated with more traditional assets. while the recent turmoil in digital asset markets had not spread to other asset classes, these participants saw digital assets’ rising importance and growing interconnectedness with other segments of the financial system as underscoring the need to establish a robust supervisory and regulatory framework for this industry that would appropriately limit potential systemic risks. a few participants mentioned the need to strengthen the oversight and regulation of certain types of nonbank financial institutions. several participants noted that capital at some of the largest banks had declined in recent quarters. these participants emphasized that it was important that the largest banks have strong capital positions and that appropriate settings of regulatory and supervisory tools can help deliver that outcome. a couple of these participants highlighted the potential role that usage of the countercyclical capital buffer could play in this context. in their consideration of the appropriate stance of monetary policy, participants concurred that the labor market was very tight and that inflation was far above the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. participants noted that recent indicators of spending and production had softened, while, by contrast, job gains had been robust and the unemployment rate had remained low. against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 75 basis points at this meeting and to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that the committee issued in may. participants observed that, following this meeting’s policy rate hike, the nominal federal funds rate would be within the range of their estimates of its longer-run neutral level. even so, with inflation elevated and expected to remain so over the near term, some participants emphasized that the real federal funds rate would likely still be below shorter-run neutral levels after this meeting’s policy rate hike. in discussing potential policy actions at upcoming meetings, participants continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate  page 10 federal open market committee would be appropriate to achieve the committee’s objectives. with inflation remaining well above the committee’s objective, participants judged that moving to a restrictive stance of policy was required to meet the committee’s legislative mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. participants concurred that the pace of policy rate increases and the extent of future policy tightening would depend on the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and risks to the outlook. participants judged that, as the stance of monetary policy tightened further, it likely would become appropriate at some point to slow the pace of policy rate increases while assessing the effects of cumulative policy adjustments on economic activity and inflation. some participants indicated that, once the policy rate had reached a sufficiently restrictive level, it likely would be appropriate to maintain that level for some time to ensure that inflation was firmly on a path back to 2 percent. participants concurred that, in expeditiously raising the policy rate, the committee was acting with resolve to lower inflation to 2 percent and anchor inflation expectations at levels consistent with that longer-run goal. participants noted that the committee’s credibility with regard to bringing inflation back to the 2 percent objective, together with its forceful policy actions and communications, had already contributed to a notable tightening of financial conditions that would likely help reduce inflation pressures by restraining aggregate demand. participants pointed to some evidence suggesting that policy actions and communications about the future path of the federal funds rate were starting to affect the economy, most visibly in interest-sensitive sectors. participants generally judged that the bulk of the effects on real activity had yet to be felt because of lags associated with the transmission of monetary policy, and that while a moderation in economic growth should support a return of inflation to 2 percent, the effects of policy firming on consumer prices were not yet apparent in the data. a number of participants posited that some of the effects of policy actions and communications were showing up more rapidly than had historically been the case, because the expeditious removal of policy accommodation and supporting communications already had led to a significant tightening of financial conditions. in light of elevated inflation and the upside risks to the outlook for inflation, participants remarked that moving to a restrictive stance of the policy rate in the near term would also be appropriate from a risk-management perspective because it would better position the committee to raise the policy rate further, to appropriately restrictive levels, if inflation were to run higher than expected. participants judged that a significant risk facing the committee was that elevated inflation could become entrenched if the public began to question the committee’s resolve to adjust the stance of policy sufficiently. if this risk materialized, it would complicate the task of returning inflation to 2 percent and could raise substantially the economic costs of doing so. many participants remarked that, in view of the constantly changing nature of the economic environment and the existence of long and variable lags in monetary policy’s effect on the economy, there was also a risk that the committee could tighten the stance of policy by more than necessary to restore price stability. these participants highlighted this risk as underscoring the importance of the committee’s data-dependent approach to judging the pace and magnitude of policy firming over coming quarters. participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective. participants agreed that a return of inflation to the 2 percent objective was necessary for sustaining a strong labor market. participants remarked that it would likely take some time for inflation to move down to the committee’s objective. participants added that the course of inflation would be influenced by various nonmonetary factors, including developments associated with russia’s war against ukraine and with supply chain disruptions. participants recognized that policy firming could slow the pace of economic growth, but they saw the return of inflation to 2 percent as critical to achieving maximum employment on a sustained basis. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators of spending and production had softened. members also concurred that, nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months and the unemployment rate had remained low. members agreed that inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. in describing the sources of elevated inflation, members judged it pertinent to add a reference to higher food prices to the statement because of the notable rise in these prices and the importance of food items in households’ budgets. members concurred that russia’s war against ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. they also agreed that the war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and  minutes of the meeting of july 26–27, 2022 page 11 were weighing on global economic activity. members remarked that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. amid evidence that covid-related lockdowns in china had generally been lifted and had affected supply chains only modestly, members generally considered it appropriate to omit from the july statement the sentence that appeared in the june statement indicating that these lockdowns were likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions. in their assessment of the monetary policy stance necessary for achieving the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2¼ to 2½ percent and anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate. in addition, members agreed that the committee would continue reducing the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mbs, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in may. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate in the event that risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. they also concurred that their assessments would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. members affirmed that the committee was strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 2.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in the calendar months of july and august that exceeds a cap of $30 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • starting in the calendar month of september, roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in the calendar months of july and august that exceeds a cap of $17.5 billion per month. • starting in the calendar month of september, reinvest into agency mbs the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. “effective july 28, 2022, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 2¼ to 2½ percent. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 2.5 percent and with an aggregate operation • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.”  page 12 federal open market committee the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators of spending and production have softened. nonetheless, job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. russia’s war against ukraine is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. the war and related events are creating additional upward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. the committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2¼ to 2½ percent and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in may. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s 6 in taking this action, the board approved requests to establish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the federal reserve banks of boston, new york, philadelphia, cleveland, richmond, atlanta, chicago, dallas, and san francisco. this vote also encompassed approval by the board of governors of the establishment of a 2.5 percent primary credit rate by the remaining federal reserve banks, effective on the later goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, james bullard, susan m. collins, lisa d. cook, esther l. george, philip n. jefferson, loretta j. mester, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 2.4 percent, effective july 28, 2022. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve a ¾ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 2.5 percent, effective july 28, 2022. 6 it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, september 20– 21, 2022. the meeting adjourned at 10:35 a.m. on july 27, 2022. notation vote by notation vote completed on july 5, 2022, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on june 14–15, 2022.  james a. clouse secretary of july 28, 2022, or the date such reserve banks inform the secretary of the board of such a request. (secretary’s note: subsequently, the federal reserve banks of st. louis, minneapolis, and kansas city were informed of the board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 2.5 percent, effective july 28, 2022.) 
nce september 21, 2022 chair powell. good afternoon. my colleagues and i are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. we have both the tools we need and the resolve that it will take to restore price stability on behalf of american families and businesses. price stability is the responsibility of the federal reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. in particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. today the fomc raised its policy interest rate by ¾ percentage point, and we anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate. we are moving our policy stance purposefully to a level that will be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent. in addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. i will have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. the u.s. economy has slowed from the historically high growth rates of 2021, which reflected the reopening of the economy following the pandemic recession. recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production. growth in consumer spending has slowed from last year’s rapid pace, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. activity in the housing sector has weakened significantly, in large part reflecting higher mortgage rates. higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment, while weaker economic growth abroad is restraining exports. as shown in our summary of economic projections, since june, fomc participants have marked down their projections for economic activity, with the median projection for real  gdp growth standing at just 0.2 percent this year and 1.2 percent next year, well below the median estimate of the longer-run normal growth rate. despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market has remained extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50-year low, job vacancies near historical highs, and wage growth elevated. job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 378,000 jobs per month over the last three months. the labor market continues to be out of balance, with demand for workers substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. the labor force participation rate showed a welcome uptick in august but is little changed since the beginning of the year. fomc participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing the upward pressure on wages and prices. the median projection in the sep for the unemployment rate rises to 4.4 percent at the end of next year, ½ percentage point higher than in the june projections. over the next three years, the median unemployment rate runs above the median estimate of its longer-run normal level. inflation remains well above our 2 percent longer-run goal. over the 12 months ending in july, total pce prices rose 6.3 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 4.6 percent. in august, the 12-month change in the consumer price index was 8.3 percent, and the change in the core cpi was 6.3 percent. price pressures remain evident across a broad range of goods and services. although gasoline prices have turned down in recent months, they remain well above year-earlier levels, in part reflecting russia’s war against ukraine, which has boosted prices for energy and food and has created additional upward pressure on inflation. the median projection in the sep for total pce inflation is 5.4 percent this year and falls to 2.8 percent next year, 2.3 percent in 2024, and 2 percent in 2025. participants continue to see risks to inflation as weighted to the upside.  despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets. but that is not grounds for complacency; the longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. at today’s meeting, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¾ percentage point, bringing the target range to 3 to 3¼ percent. and we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet, which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. over coming months, we will be looking for compelling evidence that inflation is moving down consistent with inflation returning to 2 percent. we anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate; the pace of those increases will continue to depend on the incoming data and the evolving outlook for the economy. with today’s action, we have raised interest rates by 3 percentage points this year. at some point, as the stance of monetary policy tightens further, it will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases while we assess how our cumulative policy adjustments are affecting the economy and  inflation. we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive policy stance for some time. the historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. as shown in the sep, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 4.4 percent at the end of this year, 1 percentage point higher than projected in june. the median projection rises to 4.6 percent at the end of next year and declines to 2.9 percent by the end of 2025, still above the median estimate of its longer-run value. of course, these projections do not represent a committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. we are taking forceful and rapid steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. reducing inflation is likely to require a sustained period of below-trend growth, and there will very likely be some softening of labor market conditions. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. we will keep at it until we are confident the job is done. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you, and i look forward to your questions. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thank you for taking our questions. jeanna smialek from the new york times. i wonder if you could give us a little detail around how  you’ll know when to slow down these rate increases and how you’ll eventually know when to stop. chair powell. so i will answer—i will answer your question directly, but i want to start here today by saying that my main message has not changed at all since jackson hole. the fomc is strongly resolved to bring inflation down to 2 percent, and we will keep at it until the job is done. so the way we’re thinking about this is, the overarching focus of the committee is getting inflation back down to 2 percent. to accomplish that, we think we’ll need to do two things, in particular: to achieve a period of growth below trend; and also some softening in labor market conditions to foster a better balance between demand and supply in the labor market. so on the first, the committee’s forecasts and those of most outside forecasters do show growth running below its longer-run potential this year and next year. on the second, though, so far there’s only modest evidence that the labor market is cooling off. job openings are down a bit, as you know; quits are off their all-time highs; there’s some signs that some wage measures may be flattening out but not moving up; payroll gains have moderated but not much. and in light of the high inflation we’re seeing, we think we’ll need to—and in light of what i just said, we think that we’ll need to bring our funds rate to a restrictive level and to keep it there for some time. so, what will we be looking at, i guess, is your question. so we’ll be looking at a few things. first, we’ll want to see growth continuing to run below trend, we’ll want to see movements in the labor market showing a return to a better balance between supply and demand, and, ultimately, we’ll want to see clear evidence that inflation is moving back down to 2 percent. so that’s what we’ll be looking for. in terms of reducing rates, i think we’d want to be very confident that inflation is moving back down to 2 percent before we would consider that.  michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. thank you, mr. chairman. steve liesman, cnbc. can you talk about how you factor in the variable lags on inflation and the extent to which the outlook for rates should be seen as linear in the sense that you keep raising rates? well, can you envision a time when there’s a pause to kind of look at what has been wrought in the economy from the rate increases? thank you. chair powell. sure. so, of course, monetary policy does, famously, work with long and variable lags. the way i think of it is, our policy decisions affect financial conditions immediately. in fact, financial conditions have usually been affected well before we actually announce our decisions. then, changes in financial conditions begin to affect economic activity fairly quickly, within a few months. but it’s likely to take some time to see the full effects of changing financial conditions on inflation. so we are very much mindful for that. and that’s why i noted in my opening remarks that, at some point, as the stance of policy tightens further, it will become appropriate to slow the pace of rate hikes while we assess how our cumulative policy adjustments are affecting the economy and inflation. so that’s how we think about that. your second question—sorry—was? steve liesman. is there a point in time you could see pausing? is it linear? do you keep raising rates, or is there—oh, sorry, i should know better than to not talk with a microphone. chair powell. i should know better than to answer your second question. [laughter] steve liesman. well, there you go. is it linear? do you keep raising rates, or is there a pause that you could envision where you kind of figure out what has happened to the  economy and give time to catch up in the real economy—the rate increase time to catch up in the real economy? thank you. chair powell. so i think it’s very hard to say with precise certainty the way this is going to unfold. as i mentioned, what we think we need to do and should do is to move our policy rate to a restrictive level that’s restrictive enough to bring inflation down to 2 percent, where we have confidence of that. and what you see in the sep numbers is people’s views as of today, as of this meeting, as to the kind of levels that will be appropriate. now, those will evolve over time, and i think we’ll just have to see how that goes. there is a possibility, certainly, that we would go to a certain level that we’re confident in and stay there for a time. but we’re not at that level. clearly, today we’re, we’ve just moved, i think, probably, into the very lowest level of what might be restrictive, and, certainly, in my view and the view of the committee, there’s a ways to go. michelle smith. okay. rachel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. rachel siegel from the washington post. thank you for taking our questions. the projections show the unemployment rate rising to 4.4 percent next year, and, historically, that kind of rise in the unemployment rate would typically bring a recession with it. should we interpret that to mean no soft landing, and is that kind of rise necessary to get inflation down? chair powell. right. so you’re right—in the sep, there’s what i would characterize as a relatively modest increase in the unemployment rate from a historical perspective, given the expected decline in inflation. now, why is that? so, really, that is what we generally expect because we see the current situation as outside of historical experience in a number of ways, and i’ll mention a couple of those. first—and you know these—but first, job  openings are incredibly high relative to the number of people looking for work. it’s plausible, i’ll say, that job openings could come down significantly—and they need to—without as much of an increase in unemployment as has happened in earlier historical episodes. so that’s one thing. in addition, in this cycle, longer-run inflation expectations have generally been fairly well anchored, and, as i’ve said, there’s no basis for complacency there. but to the extent that continues to be the case, that should make it easier to restore price stability. and i guess the third thing i would point to that’s different this time is that part of this inflation is caused by this series of supply shocks that we’ve had, beginning with the pandemic, and, really, with the reopening of the economy, and more recently amplified and added to by russia’s invasion of ukraine—have all contributed to the sharp increase in inflation. so these are the kinds of events that are not really seen in prior business cycles, and, in principle, if those things start to get better—and we do see some evidence of the beginnings of that. it’s not much more than that, but it’s good to see that. for example, commodity prices look like they may have peaked for now; supply chain disruptions are beginning to resolve. those developments, if sustained, could help ease the pressures on inflation. so let me just say, how much these factors will turn out to really matter in this sequence of events—it remains to be seen. we have always understood that restoring price stability while achieving a relatively modest decline—or, rather, increase—in unemployment and a soft landing would be very challenging. and we don’t know—no one knows whether this process will lead to a recession or, if so, how significant that recession would be. that’s going to depend on how quickly wage and price inflation pressures come down, whether expectations remain anchored, and whether, also, do we get more labor supply, which would help as well.  in addition, the chances of a soft landing are likely to diminish to the extent that policy needs to be more restrictive or restrictive for longer. nonetheless, we’re committed to getting inflation back down to 2 percent—because we think that a failure to restore price stability would mean far greater pain later on. rachel siegel. just to follow up on one small thing—are vacancies still at the top of your list in terms of understanding the labor market and how much room there is there? chair powell. yes, vacancies are still almost a 2-to-1 ratio to unemployed people. that and quits are really very good ways to look at how tight the labor market is and how different it is from other cycles, where, generally, the unemployment rate itself is the single best indicator. we think those things have, for quite a time now, really added value in terms of understanding where the labor market is. michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. you said not too long ago, in describing the policy destination, there’s still a way to go. but i imagine you have to have some idea about how you’re thinking about your destination, whether it’s a stopping point or a pausing point. and so i was wondering if you could discuss how you are thinking about, as the data come in, where that destination is, how it’s moving up. if inflation doesn’t perform as you expect, do you want to have a policy rate that’s above the underlying inflation rate, for example, and do you have an estimate for where you think the underlying inflation rate might be in the economy right now? chair powell. well, so, again, we believe that we need to raise our policy stance overall to a level that is restrictive—and by that i mean, is meaningfully, putting meaningful downward pressure on inflation. that’s what we need to see in the stance of policy. we also  know that there are long and variable lags, particularly as they relate to inflation. so it’s a challenging assessment. so, what do you look at? you look at broader financial conditions, as you know; you look at where rates are, real and nominal in some cases; you look at credit spreads; you look at financial conditions indexes. we also, i would think—and you see this in the—this is something we talked about today in the meeting and talk about in all of our meetings. and you see this, i think, in the committee forecast. you want to be at a place where real rates are positive across the entire yield curve. and i think that would be the case if you look at the numbers that we’re writing down and think about—you measure those against some sort of forward-looking assessment of inflation, inflation expectations. i think you would see at that time—you’d see positive real rates across the yield curve, and that is also an important consideration. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. hi. howard schneider with reuters. thanks for the opportunity. i just want to be clear on the seps. you say it’s meeting by meeting, but it sure looks like we’re going 75–50–25. is 75 next month the baseline? chair powell. so we make one decision per meeting, and the decision we made today was to raise the federal funds rate by 75 [basis points]. you’re right that the median for the year-end suggests another 125 basis points in rate increases, but there’s also, there’s another fairly large group that saw a 100 basis points addition to where we are today. so that would be 25 basis points less. so we’re going to make that decision at the meeting. we didn’t make that decision today; we didn’t vote on that. i would say that we’re committed to getting to a restrictive level for the federal funds rate and getting there pretty quickly, and that’s what we’re thinking about.  howard schneider. so, just as a follow-up to that, i’m wondering about the sort of risk-management considerations here, given there’s some discussion now of overdoing it. what’s the incentive to continue front-loading right now? is it lack of progress on inflation seen in the cpi reports? or is it a motivation to get as much done while the job market is still as strong as it is? chair powell. so, what we’ve seen is, inflation has—our expectation has been that we would begin to see inflation come down, largely because of supply-side healing. by now we would have thought that we’d have seen some of that. we haven’t. we have seen some supply- side healing, but inflation has not really come down. if you look at core pce inflation, which is a good measure of where inflation is running now, if you look at it on a 3-, 6-, and 12-month trailing annualized basis, you’ll see that inflation is at 4.8 percent, 4.5 percent, and 4.8 percent. so that’s a pretty good summary of where we are with inflation. and that’s not where we expected or wanted to be. so, what that tells us is that we need to continue, and we can—keep doing these, and we did today—do another large increase as we approach the level that we think we need to get to. and we’re still discovering what that level is. but people are writing that down in their sep where they think policy needs to be. so that’s how we’re thinking about it. michelle smith. let’s go to colby. colby smith. thank you. colby smith with the financial times. chair powell, how should we interpret the fact that core inflation is still not forecast in the sep to be back to target in 2025, and yet the dot plot projects cuts as early as 2024? and does that mean there’s a level of inflation above the 2 percent target that the fed is willing to tolerate? chair powell. so i guess core is at 2.1 in 2025—in the median—and headline is at 2.0, so that’s pretty close. i mean, we write down our forecasts, and we figure out what the  median is, and we publish it. so it’s not—i mean, i would say that if, actually, if the economy followed this path, this would be a pretty good outcome. but you’re right—it is a tenth higher than 2 percent. colby smith. okay. just as a quick follow-up: i mean, if the concern is that underlying inflation is becoming more entrenched, perhaps, each month, then why forgo the more aggressive 100 basis point increase today, and does that risk having to do more later on? chair powell. yeah. so we, as we said at the last press conference and in between that one and this one, we said that we would make our decision based on the overall data coming in. so, if you remember, we got a surprisingly low reading in july and then a surprisingly high reading for august. so i think you have to—you can’t really—you never want to overreact too much to any one data point. so if you look at them together—and, as i just mentioned, if you really look at this year’s inflation, 3-, 6-, and 12-month trailing, you see inflation is running too high. it’s running 4.5 percent or above; you don’t need to know much more than that. if that’s the one thing you know, you know that this committee is committed to getting to a meaningfully restrictive stance of policy and staying there until we feel confident that inflation is coming down. that’s how we think about it. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi. victoria guida with politico. i wanted to ask about the balance sheet. you all have left open the possibility that you might sell mortgage-backed securities, but we’ve seen significant slowing in the housing market. mortgage rates have gone up significantly, and i’m just wondering whether conditions there might affect your plans for how quickly you have the runoff on the mbs side.  chair powell. so we, what we said, as you know, was that we would consider that once balance sheet runoff is well under way. i would say it’s not something we’re considering right now and not something i expect to be considering in the near term. it’s just, it’s something i think we will turn to, but that time, the time for turning to it, has not come and is not close. victoria guida. will conditions in the housing market affect that decision? chair powell. i think a number of things might affect that decision, really. the main thing is, we’re not considering that decision, and i don’t expect that we will any time soon. michelle smith. thank you. neil. neil irwin. thanks. neil irwin with axios. a number of commentators have come to the view, including over at the world bank, that simultaneous global tightening around the world is, creates a risk of a global recession that’s worse than is necessary to bring inflation down. how do you see that risk? how do you think of coordination with your fellow central bankers? and is there much risk of overdoing it on a global level? chair powell. so we, actually, my colleagues and i, a number of my fomc colleagues and i, just got back from one of our frequent trips to basel, switzerland, to meet with other senior central bank officials from around the world. we are in pretty regular contact, and we exchange, of course—we all serve a domestic mandate, domestic objectives—in our case, the dual mandate, maximum employment and price stability. but we regularly discuss what we’re seeing in terms of our own economy and international spillovers, and it’s a very ongoing, constant kind of a process. so we are very aware of what’s going on in other economies around the world and what that means for us, and vice versa. the forecasts that we put together, that our staff puts together, and that we put together on our own always take all of that—try to take all of that into account. i  mean, i can’t say that we do it perfectly, but it’s not as if we don’t think about the policy decisions—monetary policy and otherwise—the economic developments that are taking place in major economies that can have an effect on the u.s. economy. that is very much baked into our own forecast and our own understanding of the u.s. economy, as best we can. it won’t be perfect. so i don’t see—it’s hard to talk about collaboration in a world where people have very different levels of interest rates. if you remember, there were coordinated cuts and raises and things like that at various times, but, really, we’re all, we’re in very different situations. but i will tell you, our contact is more or less ongoing, and it’s not coordination, but there’s a lot of information sharing. and we all, i think, are informed by what other important economies— economies that are important to the united states—are doing. michelle smith. craig. craig torres. craig torres from bloomberg. chair powell, you talked about some ways the higher interest rates are affecting the economy, but we’ve also seen a resilient labor market with durable consumption, strong corporate profits, and i’m wondering what your story is on the resilience of the economy. after all, you and your colleagues said, “well, we started tightening in march when we were talking about interest rates in the future.” and, indeed, treasury rates moved up, so we should have had a lot of tightening taking effect. why is the economy, in your view, so resilient, and does it mean that we might need a possibly higher terminal rate? chair powell. you’re right, of course—the labor market, in particular, has been very strong. but there are—the sectors of the economy that are most interest rate sensitive are certainly showing the effects of our tightening, and, of course, the obvious example is housing,  where you see declining activity of all different kinds and house price increases moving down. so we’re having an effect on interest-sensitive spending. i think, through exchange rates, we’re having an effect on exports and imports. i think—so all of that’s happening, but you’re right, and we’ve said this: this is a strong, robust economy. people have savings on their balance sheet from the period when they couldn’t spend and where they were getting government transfers. there’s still very significant savings out there, although not as much at the lower end of the income spectrum—but still, some savings out there to support growth. the states are very flush with cash, so there’s good reason to think that this will continue to be a reasonably strong economy. now, the data sort of are showing that growth is going to be below trend this year. we think of trend as being about 1.8 percent, or in that range. we’re forecasting growth well below that, and most forecasters are. but you’re right—there’s certainly a possibility that growth can be stronger than that. and that’s a good thing, because that means the economy will be more resistant to a significant downturn. but, of course, we are focused on the thing i started with, which is getting inflation back down to 2 percent. we can’t fail to do that. i mean, if we were to fail to do that, that would be the thing that would be most painful for the people that we serve. so for now, that has to be our overarching focus, and you see that, i think, in the sep, in the levels of rates that we’ll be moving to reasonably quickly, assuming things turn out roughly in line with the sep. so that’s how we think about it. michelle smith. mike. thank you. michael mckee. thank you, mr. chairman. in a world of euphemisms that we live in here, with “below-trend growth” and “modest increase in unemployment,” i’m wondering if i can ask you a couple of direct questions for the american people. do the odds now favor, given where  you are and where you’re going with interest rates, favor a recession? four point four percent unemployment is about 1.3 million jobs. is that acceptable job loss? and then, given that the data you look at is backward looking, and the lags in your policy are forward looking, and you don’t know what they are, how will you know, or will you know, if you’ve gone too far? chair powell. so i don’t know what the odds are. i think that there’s a very high likelihood that we’ll have a period of what i’ve mentioned is below-trend growth, by which i mean much lower growth, and we’re seeing that now. so the median forecast, i think, this year among my colleagues and me was 0.2 percent growth. so that’s very slow growth. and then below trend next year. i think the median was 1.2, also well below. so that’s a slower, that’s a very slow level of growth, and it could give rise to increases in unemployment. but i think that’s, so that is something that we think we need to have, and we think we need to have softer labor market conditions as well. we’re never going to say that there are too many people working, but the real point is this: inflation—what we hear from people when we meet with them is that they really are suffering from inflation. and if we want to set ourselves up, really light the way to another period of a very strong labor market, we have got to get inflation behind us. i wish there were a painless way to do that. there isn’t. so, what we need to do is get rates up to the point where we’re putting meaningful downward pressure on inflation, and that’s what we’re doing. and we certainly don’t hope, we certainly haven’t given up the idea that we can have a relatively modest increase in unemployment. nonetheless, we need to complete this task. michael mckee. but how will you know, or will you know, if you’ve gone too far? chair powell. it’s hard to hypothetically deal with that question. i mean, again, our really tight focus now continues to be ongoing rate increases to get the policy rate up where it  needs to be. and, as i said, you can look at this sep as today’s estimate of where we think those rates would be. of course, they will evolve over time. michelle smith. chris rugaber. chris rugaber. thanks. chris rugaber, associated press. i wanted to follow up with what you just mentioned about the labor market. you’ve said several times that to have the labor market we want, we need price stability, and you suggested maybe there isn’t a tradeoff in the long run. but in the short run, there is a lot of concern, as people have been expressing here, about higher unemployment as a result of these rate hikes or as a result of rate hikes. so can you explain, though, what about high inflation now threatens the job market? i mean, you seem to suggest inflation, high inflation, will eventually lead to a weaker job market. so can you spell that out a little more for the general public on how that would work? chair powell. so, for starters, people are seeing their wage increases eaten up by inflation. so if your family is one where you spend most of your paycheck, every paycheck cycle, on gas, food, transportation, clothing, basics of life, and prices go up the way they’ve been going up, you’re in trouble right away. you don’t have a cushion, and this is very painful for people at the lower end of the income and wealth spectrum. so that’s what we’re hearing from people is, you know, very much—that inflation is really hurting. so how do we get rid of inflation? and, as i mentioned, it would be nice if there were a way to just wish it away, but there isn’t. we have to get supply and demand back into alignment, and the way we do that is by slowing the economy. hopefully, we do that by slowing the economy, and we see some softening in labor market conditions, and we see a big contribution from supply-side improvements, and things like that. but none of that is guaranteed.  in any case, we, our job is to deliver price stability, and i think—you can think of price stability as an asset that just delivers large benefits to society over a long period of time. we really saw that for a long time. the united states had 2 percent inflation, didn’t move around much, and that was enormously beneficial to the public that we serve. and we have to get back to that and keep it for another long period of time. to pull back from the task of doing that is, you’re just postponing—the record shows that if you postpone that, the delay is only likely to lead to more pain. so i think we’re moving to do what we need to do and do our jobs, and that’s what you see us doing. michelle smith. edward. edward lawrence. thank you for taking the question, mr. chairman. edward lawrence for fox business. so you had said that americans and businesses need to feel some economic pain as we go forward. how long from here should americans be prepared for that economic pain? chair powell. how long? i mean, it really depends on how long it takes for wages and, more than that, prices to come down for inflation to come down. and so what you see in our projections today is that inflation moves down significantly over the course of next year and then more the next year after that. and i think once you’re on that path, that’s a good thing. and things will start to feel better to people—they’ll feel lower inflation, they’ll feel that the economy is improving. and also, if our projections are close to right, you’ll see that the costs in unemployment are, they’re meaningful, and they’re certainly very meaningful to the people who lose their jobs. and we talk about that in our meetings quite a lot. but, at the same time, we’d be setting the economy up for another long period—this era has been noted for very long expansions. we’ve had three of the four longest in measured  history since we got inflation under control. and that’s not an accident. so when inflation is low and stable, you can have these 9, 10, 11—10-year, anyway, expansions, and you can see what we saw in 2018, ’19, and ’20, which was very low unemployment, the biggest wage gains going to people at the low end of the spectrum, the smallest racial gaps that we’ve seen since we started keeping track of that. so we want to get back to that. but, to get there, we’re going to have to get supply and demand back in alignment, and that’s going to take tight monetary policy for a period of time. edward lawrence. as a follow-up, what is that economic pain in your mind? is it job losses? is it higher interest rates on credit cards? what is that economic pain? chair powell. so it’s all of those things. higher interest rates, slower growth, and a softening labor market are all painful for the public that we serve. but they’re not as painful as failing to restore price stability and then having to come back and do it down the road again and doing it at a time when, actually, now people have really come to expect high inflation. if the concept of high inflation becomes entrenched in people’s economic thinking about their decisions, then sort of getting back to price stability—the cost of getting back to price stability just rises, and so we want to avoid that. we want to act aggressively now and get this job done and keep at it until it’s done. michelle smith. nicole, from cnn. nicole goodkind. thank you, chairman powell. nicole goodkind, cnn business. existing home sales have fallen for seven months straight, mortgage rates are at their highest level since 2008, yet mortgage demand increased this week, and housing prices are still elevated. now, at the end of your june press conference, you mentioned plans to reset the  housing market. i was wondering if you could elaborate on what you mean when you say “reset” and what you think it will take to actually get there. chair powell. so when i say “reset,” i’m not looking at a particular, specific set of data or anything. what i’m really saying is that we’ve had a time of a red-hot housing market all over the country, where, famously, houses were selling to the first buyer at 10 percent above the ask, before even seeing the house. that kind of thing. so there was a big imbalance between supply and demand. housing prices were going up at an unsustainably fast level. so the deceleration in housing prices that we’re seeing should help bring sort of prices more closely in line with rents and other housing market fundamentals, and that’s a good thing. for the longer term, what we need is supply and demand to get better aligned so that housing prices go up at a reasonable level—at a reasonable pace—and that people can afford houses again. and i think we—so we probably, in the housing market, have to go through a correction to get back to that place. there’s also, there are also longer-run issues, though, with the housing market. as you know, we’re—it’s difficult to find lots now close enough to cities and things like that, so builders are having a hard time getting zoning and lots and workers and materials and things like that. but from a sort of business cycle standpoint, this difficult correction should put the housing market back into better balance. nicole goodkind. just to follow, though, shelter made up such a large part of this hot cpi report that we saw. do you think that there is a lag and that we will see that come down in the coming months? or do you think that there’s still this imbalance that needs to be addressed? chair powell. i think that shelter inflation is going to remain high for some time. we’re looking for it to come down, but it’s not exactly clear when that will happen. so it may  take some time, so i think, hope for the best, plan for the worst. so i think, on shelter inflation, you’ve just got to assume that it’s going to remain pretty high for a while. michelle smith. okay, we’ll go to jean for the last question. jean yung. hi. jean yung with market news. you’ve talked about the need to get real rates into positive territory, and you said earlier that policy is just moving into that territory now. so i’m curious, how restrictive is rates at 4.6 percent expected—is that expected to be next year? how restrictive? chair powell. so i think if you look, when we get to—if we—let’s assume we do get to that level, which i think is likely. what you’re going to do is, you’re going to adjust that for some forward-looking measure of inflation. and that could be—you pick your measure. it could be—there are all kinds of different things you could pick and you get—but what you’ll get is a positive number. in all cases, you will get forward inflation expectations in the short term, i think, that are going to be, assuming that we’re doing our jobs appropriately, that will be significant. so you’ll have a positive [real] federal funds rate at that point, which could be 1 percent or so, but—i mean, i don’t know exactly what it would be. but it would be significantly positive when we get to that level. and let me say, we’ve written down what we think is a plausible path for the federal funds rate. the path that we actually execute will be enough. it will be enough to restore price stability. so this is something that, as you can see, they’ve moved up, and we’re going to continue to watch incoming data and the evolving outlook and ask ourselves whether our policy is in the right place as we go. thank you very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 2 page 2 federal open market committee  glenn follette, associate director, division of research and statistics, board michelle m. neal, head of markets, federal reserve bank of new york joshua gallin, senior special adviser to the chair, division of board members, board edward nelson, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board michael s. gibson, director, division of supervision and regulation, board giovanni olivei, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of boston luca guerrieri, deputy associate director, division of financial stability, board anna paulson, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of chicago diana hancock, senior associate director, division of research and statistics, board karen m. pence,5 deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board andrea raffo, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of minneapolis matteo iacoviello, senior associate director, division of international finance, board linda robertson, assistant to the board, division of board members, board jane e. ihrig, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board jeremy b. rudd, senior adviser, division of research and statistics, board callum jones, senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board achilles sangster ii, senior information manager, division of monetary affairs, board edward s. knotek ii, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of cleveland john w. schindler, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board sylvain leduc, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of san francisco samuel schulhofer-wohl, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of dallas andreas lehnert, director, division of financial stability, board seth searls,4 associate director, federal reserve bank of new york paul lengermann, assistant director, division of research and statistics, board nitish r. sinha, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board kurt f. lewis, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board john j. stevens, senior associate director, division of research and statistics, board dan li, assistant director, division of monetary affairs, board annette vissing-jørgensen, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board laura lipscomb, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board jeffrey d. walker,4 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board david lópez-salido, senior associate director, division of monetary affairs, board jonathan p. mccarthy, economic research advisor, federal reserve bank of new york ann e. misback, secretary, office of the secretary, board attended from the discussion of the economic and financial situation through the end of wednesday’s session. 5 min wei, senior associate director, division of monetary affairs, board paul r. wood, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board nathaniel wuerffel, head of domestic markets, federal reserve bank of new york minutes of the meeting of september 20–21, 2022 page 3  rebecca zarutskie, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board andrei zlate, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager pro tem turned first to a discussion of financial market developments over the intermeeting period. u.s. financial conditions tightened over the period, largely reflecting an upward revision in investors’ outlook for the path of the policy rate. treasury yields climbed substantially, with most of the upward move reflected in real yields. equity prices initially rose amid second-quarter earnings reports that were better than feared but later retraced those gains in response to the shifting policy outlook. regarding international developments, yields in most advanced foreign economies (afes) also rose sharply as a number of other central banks lifted policy rates and indicated in their communications that they would likely continue to tighten monetary policy in order to address inflation pressures. the exchange value of the dollar appreciated notably, reaching multidecade highs in real terms, as market participants perceived mounting economic challenges abroad. the market-implied path of the federal funds rate shifted sharply higher after market participants interpreted federal reserve communications—particularly those provided at the jackson hole symposium—along with incoming data, as indicating a more restrictive path of policy than previously expected. policy-sensitive rates suggested that a 75 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate was widely expected to be decided on at the committee’s september meeting, with some chance of a 100 basis point move. in addition, the market-implied path suggested reasonable odds of additional 75 basis point and 50 basis point rate increases at the november and december meetings, respectively. market participants generally anticipated a further slowing in the pace of rate increases after december, with the peak policy rate being reached in the first half of 2023. beyond that period, the market-implied path of the federal funds rate sloped downward, likely reflecting downside risks to the policy rate path. the median respondent to the open market desk surveys expected the policy rate path to remain flat through 2023 after the peak rate was reached. on average, desk survey respondents assigned an almost 30 percent probability to a decline in real gross domestic product (gdp) over 2022, nearly double the probability assigned in the july survey. the manager pro tem turned next to a discussion of policy implementation. balance sheet runoff had continued to proceed smoothly over the intermeeting period. with caps on redemptions of treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) doubling in september, the pace of balance sheet runoff was set to increase over coming months. the markets for treasury securities and agency mbs continued to function in an orderly manner, though liquidity conditions in both markets remained low, reflecting elevated interest rate uncertainty. in money markets, the 75 basis point increase in the target range at the july meeting passed through fully to overnight rates. amid strong demand for short-term investments, take-up at the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility was relatively steady at elevated levels. the staff continued to anticipate that on rrp take-up would decline in coming quarters from its currently elevated levels as money market participants responded to shifting conditions. issuance of short-term securities was likely to increase in coming periods, and, as more clarity emerged in the economic and policy outlook, demand for short-term assets could moderate. both of these developments would ease downward pressure on yields on safe short-term investments. the gradual reduction in on rrp balances could also be facilitated by rising competition among banks in seeking deposits. the manager pro tem indicated that the staff would continue to monitor money market developments closely in order to assess whether any frictions were emerging in this process. the manager pro tem concluded with an update on operational matters. as expected, federal reserve net income turned negative in september. the staff expected that the size of the associated deferred asset would increase over time until net income turned positive, likely in a few years. the desk planned to begin aggregation of those agency mbs held in the system open market account (soma) that are not eligible to be commingled into uniform mbs and, specifically, the freddie mac mbs that were issued before june 2019 and have a 45-day payment delay; decisions about any additional aggregations would be made at a later date. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. page 4 federal open market committee  staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the september 20–21 meeting suggested that u.s. real gdp was increasing at a modest pace in the third quarter after having declined over the first half of the year. labor demand remained strong, and the labor market continued to be very tight. recent monthly readings indicated that consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—remained elevated. total nonfarm payroll employment posted robust gains in july and august at an average pace that was only slightly below what was seen over the first half of the year. the unemployment rate edged up, on net, from 3.6 percent in june to 3.7 percent in august. the unemployment rate for african americans increased over this period, while the rate for hispanics moved up slightly on net; both rates were noticeably higher than the national average. the labor force participation rate and employment-to-population ratio both rose, on net, from june to august. the private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, moved slightly lower from may to july but remained at a high level. nominal wage growth continued to be rapid and broad based: average hourly earnings rose 5.2 percent over the 12 months ending in august, while the employment cost index of hourly compensation in the private sector, which also includes benefit costs, rose 5.5 percent over the 12 months ending in june, 2.4 percentage points faster than the year-earlier pace. consumer price inflation remained elevated. total pce price inflation was 6.3 percent over the 12 months ending in july, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.6 percent over the same period. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 4.4 percent in july. in august, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 8.3 percent, while core cpi inflation was 6.3 percent over the same period. survey-based measures of short-run inflation expectations declined in recent weeks, while measures of longerterm inflation expectations remained roughly stable or moved lower. available spending indicators, including the august retail sales report, suggested that real pce was on track to post a modest gain in the third quarter. however, the latest housing market data pointed to another sharp contraction in residential investment in the third quarter, and business fixed investment appeared to be rising at a tepid pace. real goods exports stepped up in june and then rose further in july, led by increases in exports of industrial supplies. by contrast, real goods imports stepped down in june and then fell sharply in july, driven by a large decline in consumer goods imports. exports and imports of services continued to be held back by an incomplete recovery of international travel. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit continued to narrow in june and july. altogether, net exports contributed positively to gdp growth in the second quarter and appeared on track to make another positive contribution in the third quarter. data pointed to weak foreign growth in recent months, weighed down by the global reverberations from russia’s war against ukraine and a loss of momentum in the chinese economy. in europe, further disruptions to the supply of energy exacerbated declines in real disposable incomes and in consumer and business confidence, restraining economic activity. in china, recent indicators suggest only a partial rebound from the effects of earlier severe covid-19-related lockdowns as well as increasing concerns about the property sector. weaker growth in china and the broader global economy also weighed on export-oriented emerging market economies in asia. consumer price inflation rose further in august in many foreign economies, reflecting past increases in energy and food prices, but also a continued broadening of inflationary pressure to core prices. with inflation persistently high, many central banks continued to tighten monetary policy. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, u.s. treasury yields and the market-implied federal funds rate path moved higher. broad domestic equity price indexes decreased slightly, on balance, but market volatility remained elevated. credit remained widely available to most types of borrowers, but increases in borrowing costs appeared to damp the demand for credit in some markets in recent months. measures of current loan performance for businesses and most households remained generally stable. however, more recently, expectations of future credit quality for businesses deteriorated slightly, and delinquency rates rose for some types of credit owed by households with low credit scores. the expected path of the federal funds rate—implied by a straight read of financial market quotes—rose in the period since the july fomc meeting, largely reflecting minutes of the meeting of september 20–21, 2022 page 5  more-restrictive-than-expected monetary policy communications amid stronger-than-expected economic data and ongoing concerns about high inflation. on net, nominal treasury yields increased significantly across the maturity spectrum. the increases in nominal treasury yields were primarily accounted for by rising real yields, while inflation compensation measures declined substantially at short horizons and remained relatively little changed at medium- and longer-term horizons. broad equity price indexes decreased slightly, on net, as substantial early gains arising from investors’ improved perceptions about the inflation outlook and better-thanfeared second-quarter earnings were more than offset by later losses arising from expectations that the committee would follow a more restrictive policy than previously expected. one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—increased somewhat, on net, and remained elevated by historical norms, partly reflecting investor uncertainty and risks associated with higher inflation and the expected move to a restrictive policy stance. corporate bond spreads narrowed slightly, on net, and remained roughly at the midpoints of their historical distributions. reflecting increases in both policy rates and corporate bond spreads, yields on corporate bonds rose significantly since the start of the year. municipal bond spreads over comparable-maturity treasury yields widened a touch. conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period, with the july increase in the federal reserve’s administered interest rates passing through quickly to other money market rates. although secured overnight rates firmed slightly later in the intermeeting period, they remained soft relative to the on rrp offering rate—a configuration that market participants attributed to relatively low treasury bill supply combined with strong investor demand for shortdated instruments amid uncertainty about the future path of the policy rate. consistent with continued softness in repurchase agreement rates, daily take-up in the on rrp facility remained elevated. spreads on lowerrated short-term commercial paper changed little on net. bank deposit rates continued to increase modestly in august, following a lagged response to increases in the federal funds rate, while money market mutual funds’ net yields rose along with the increases in short-term rates. sovereign yields in most afes rose notably over the intermeeting period as major central banks raised their policy rates and communicated a tighter stance of future policy in the face of persistent inflationary pressures. yields on japanese government securities, however, ended the period little changed, as the bank of japan reaffirmed its accommodative monetary policy stance. measures of foreign inflation compensation were volatile amid large swings in european natural gas prices but increased moderately on net. the u.s. dollar appreciated further against most major currencies, reaching multi-decade highs against the euro, the british pound, and the japanese yen. the dollar’s strength largely reflected increasing investor concerns about the global growth outlook as well as widening interest rate differentials between the united states and japan. growth concerns also weighed on foreign equity prices, which declined moderately. outflows from funds dedicated to emerging markets continued at a modest pace, and credit spreads in emerging market economies narrowed somewhat on net. in domestic credit markets, borrowing costs continued to rise over the intermeeting period. yields on both corporate bonds and institutional leveraged loans increased. bank interest rates for commercial and industrial (c&i) and commercial real estate (cre) loans also increased. among small businesses that borrow on a regular basis, the share of firms facing higher borrowing costs continued to climb through august. municipal bond yields increased across ratings categories. borrowing costs for residential mortgage loans increased and reached their highest levels since 2008. interest rates on most credit card accounts continued to move higher, in line with the rise in the federal funds rate, and auto loan interest rates rose steadily through august. credit remained generally available to businesses and households, but high borrowing costs appeared to reduce the demand for credit, resulting in lower financing volumes in some markets. issuance of nonfinancial corporate bonds slowed further in july from the weak levels seen in the second quarter but rebounded somewhat in august and so far in september. gross institutional leveraged loan issuance increased modestly in july from subdued levels but continued to be weak in august. equity issuance remained depressed, while issuance of municipal bonds was sluggish over the summer and so far in september. according to the july senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices, banks tightened credit standards on c&i lending for the first time in two years, but c&i loans on banks’ balance sheets expanded at a strong pace in july and august, reflecting strong demand from nonfinancial businesses. cre loans on banks’ bal- page 6 federal open market committee  ance sheets also continued to grow robustly, but issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) slowed in july from its strong pace earlier in the year. credit availability to small businesses appeared to be tightening somewhat. the share of small firms reporting that it was more difficult to obtain loans continued its upward trend in august but remained lower than its historical average. credit in the residential mortgage market remained available for high-credit-score borrowers. credit availability for low-credit-score borrowers continued to ease through july but remained modestly tight—close to prepandemic averages. however, the volumes of both home-purchase and refinance mortgage originations plunged in july amid rising mortgage rates. consumer credit remained available to most households in june and july, but about half of the respondents in the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations indicated that it was harder to obtain credit than it was a year earlier and that they expected it to become even harder over the next year. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained generally strong, with low default rates for both corporate bonds and leveraged loans. the volume of rating upgrades in the corporate bond market outpaced that of downgrades in july and august, but, so far in september, these relative volumes reversed. the volume of rating downgrades in the leveraged loan market continued to exceed that of upgrades. credit quality for c&i and cre loans on banks’ balance sheets also remained sound, as delinquency rates remained at low levels through june. however, banks increased loan loss provisions somewhat in the second quarter. delinquency rates on cre loans securitized into cmbs remained unchanged in july, delinquency rates on small business loans stayed quite low after edging up, and the credit quality of municipal securities remained strong. household credit quality stayed broadly solid but continued to worsen for some types of credit owed by borrowers with low credit scores. mortgage delinquencies trended down in recent months, and the share of mortgages in foreclosure remained low in july. by contrast, credit card and auto credit delinquency rates rose over the second quarter, particularly among subprime borrowers, with subprime auto loan delinquency rates rebounding notably to slightly above their historical averages. staff economic outlook the projection for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the september fomc meeting was slightly weaker than the july forecast. however, the staff’s estimate of potential output in recent history was revised down significantly in response to continued disappointing productivity growth and the sluggish gains in labor force participation seen so far this year; moreover, this lower trajectory for potential output was expected to persist throughout the forecast period. as a result, the staff’s estimate of the output gap was revised up considerably this year, and while the staff projection still had the output gap closing in coming years, the level of output was expected to be slightly above potential at the end of 2025. likewise, the unemployment rate was expected to rise more slowly than in the july projection and to be slightly below the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at the end of 2025. on a 12-month change basis, total pce price inflation was expected to be 5.1 percent in 2022, and core inflation was expected to be 4.3 percent. although the staff continued to project that core inflation would step down over the next two years—reflecting the anticipated resolution of supply–demand imbalances and a labor market that was expected to become less tight—core inflation was revised up in each year of the projection. in 2025, core inflation was expected to be 2.1 percent. total pce price inflation was expected to decline to 2.6 percent in 2023 as core inflation slowed and energy prices declined. total pce inflation was expected to move down further in 2024, to 2 percent, and to remain at 2 percent in 2025. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside. in addition to russia’s war in ukraine, weakening activity abroad, and ongoing supply chain bottlenecks, the possibility that a persistent reduction in inflation could require a greater-than-assumed amount of tightening in financial conditions was viewed by the staff as a salient downside risk to their forecast for real activity. the staff viewed the risks to the inflation projection as skewed to the upside on the grounds that supply conditions might not improve as much as expected and energy prices might rise sharply again. the staff also pointed to the possibility that wage increases could put a greater-thanexpected amount of upward pressure on price inflation and the possibility that inflation expectations could become unanchored given the large rise in inflation seen over the past year as additional upside risks to the inflation forecast. minutes of the meeting of september 20–21, 2022 page 7  participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2022 through 2025 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that recent indicators had pointed to modest growth in spending and production. job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. participants recognized that russia’s war against ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. participants judged that the war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. against this background, participants remained highly attentive to inflation risks. with regard to the economic outlook, participants noted that recent data pointed to modest growth in economic activity over the second half of this year. participants observed that recent indicators of consumer spending and business investment suggested modest increases in those spending categories but noted that activity in interest-sensitive sectors weakened appreciably. participants revised down their projections of real gdp growth for this year from their projections in june. several participants noted that the continued strength in the labor market, as well as the data on gross domestic income, raised the possibility that the current gdp data could understate the strength in economic activity this year. participants generally anticipated that the u.s. economy would grow at a below-trend pace in this and the coming few years, with the labor market becoming less tight, as monetary policy assumed a restrictive stance and global headwinds persisted. participants noted that a period of below-trend real gdp growth would help reduce inflationary pressures and set the stage for the sustained achievement of the committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability. in their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that consumer spending grew moderately, reflecting strength in the labor market, the elevated level of household savings accumulated during the pandemic, and a strong aggregate household-sector balance sheet. several participants noted that spending appeared to have held up relatively well, especially among higher-income households. these participants also noted that the composition of spending by low-to-moderate-income households—who were affected to a greater degree by high food, energy, and shelter prices—was changing, with discretionary expenditures being cut and purchases shifting to lower-cost options. participants observed that the notable slowdown in residential investment and other interest-sensitive spending had continued, reflecting the effect of the committee’s monetary policy actions and tighter financial conditions. with regard to the business sector, participants observed that growth in investment spending appeared modest. several participants mentioned that manufacturing activity had slowed. a couple of participants noted that businesses were constrained in undertaking new capital projects, as they faced higher financing costs, persistent challenges associated with supply bottlenecks, and hiring difficulties resulting from the continued tightness of the labor market. participants discussed how they perceived challenging supply conditions to be evolving. many participants remarked that their business contacts were reporting signs of relief in supply bottlenecks, such as declines in shipping costs and delivery times and rising inventories, while several participants saw little improvement in the supply situation. participants saw supply bottlenecks as likely continuing for a while longer, and a couple commented that constraints on production were increasingly taking the form of labor shortages rather than parts shortages. participants observed that the labor market had remained very tight, as evidenced by a historically low unemployment rate, elevated job vacancies and quit rates, a low pace of layoffs, robust employment gains, and high nominal wage growth. a few participants remarked that employers facing particularly acute labor shortages were those associated with professional occupations, service industries, skilled trades, and smaller firms. some participants noted a number of developments consistent with the labor market moving toward better balance, including a lower rate of job turnover, a moderation in employment growth, and an increase in the labor force participation rate for prime-age workers. however, several page 8 federal open market committee  participants assessed that the scope for further improvement in labor force participation was likely limited, especially in view of the sizable contribution that retirements had made to the previous decline in the participation rate. participants anticipated that the supply and demand imbalances in the labor market would gradually diminish and the unemployment rate would likely rise somewhat, importantly reflecting the effects of tighter monetary policy. participants judged that a softening in the labor market would be needed to ease upward pressures on wages and prices. participants expected that the transition toward a softer labor market would be accompanied by an increase in the unemployment rate. several commented that they considered it likely that the transition would occur primarily through reduced job vacancies and slower job creation. a couple of participants remarked that, in light of challenges in hiring, businesses might be less willing to reduce their staffing levels in the event of a weakening in general economic activity. a few participants particularly stressed the high uncertainty associated with the expected future path of the unemployment rate and commented that the unemployment rate could rise by considerably more than in the staff forecast. participants observed that inflation remained unacceptably high and well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. participants commented that recent inflation data generally had come in above expectations and that, correspondingly, inflation was declining more slowly than they had previously been anticipating. price pressures had remained elevated and had persisted across a broad array of product categories. energy prices had declined in recent months but remained considerably higher than in 2021, and upside risks to energy prices remained. several participants noted the continued elevated rates of increase in core goods prices. these participants considered this development as potentially indicating that the shift of household spending from goods to services might be having a smaller effect on goods prices than they expected or that the supply bottlenecks and labor shortages were taking longer to be resolved. participants commented that they expected inflation pressures to persist in the near term. numerous contributing factors were cited as supporting this view, including labor market tightness and the resulting upward pressure on nominal wages, continuing supply chain disruptions, and the persistent nature of increases in services prices, particularly shelter prices. with respect to the medium term, participants judged that inflation pressures would gradually recede in coming years. various factors were cited as likely to contribute to this outcome, including the committee’s tightening of its policy stance, a gradual easing of supply and demand imbalances in labor and product markets, and the likelihood that weaker consumer demand would result in a reduction of business profit margins from their current elevated levels. a few participants reported that business contacts in certain retail sectors—such as used cars and apparel—were planning to cut prices in order to help reduce their inventories. several participants commented that while households across the income distribution were burdened by elevated inflation, those at the lower end of the income distribution were particularly harmed, as a larger share of their income was spent on housing and other necessities. in assessing inflation expectations, participants noted that longer-term expectations appeared to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures obtained from financial markets. participants remarked that the committee’s affirmation of its strong commitment to its price-stability objective, together with its forceful policy actions, had likely helped keep longerrun inflation expectations anchored. some stressed that a more prolonged period of elevated inflation would increase the risk of inflation expectations becoming unanchored, making it much more costly to bring inflation down. a few participants discussed the increased dispersion of longer-term inflation expectations across respondents in various surveys, with an increase in the number of respondents reporting relatively low expectations of future inflation acknowledged as a key driver of the increased dispersion but with a couple of participants citing higher inflation expectations among some survey respondents as a cause for concern and a reason not to be complacent about longer-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. participants agreed that the uncertainty associated with their economic outlooks was high and that risks to their inflation outlook were weighted to the upside. some participants noted rising labor tensions, a new round of global energy price increases, further disruptions in supply chains, and a larger-than-expected pass-through of wage increases into price increases as potential shocks that, if they materialized, could compound an already challenging inflation problem. a number of participants commented that a wage–price spiral had not yet developed but cited its possible emergence as a risk. minutes of the meeting of september 20–21, 2022 page 9  participants broadly judged the risks to real gdp growth to be weighted to the downside, with various global headwinds most prominently cited as contributing factors. these global headwinds included heightened risk of recession in europe, a slowdown in economic activity occurring in china, and the ongoing global economic implications of russia’s war against ukraine. several participants noted that the monetary policy tightening under way in many other economies would affect global financial markets and foreign real gdp growth, with the potential for spillovers to the u.s. economy. in their consideration of the appropriate stance of monetary policy, participants concurred that the labor market was very tight and that inflation was far above the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. participants observed that recent indicators of production and spending had pointed to modest growth, while job gains had been robust and the unemployment rate had remained low. against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 75 basis points at this meeting and to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that the committee issued in may. policymakers observed that the rate hike at this meeting was another step toward making the committee’s monetary policy stance sufficiently restrictive to help ease supply and demand imbalances and to bring inflation back to 2 percent. participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective, with many stressing the importance of staying on this course even as the labor market slowed. in discussing potential policy actions at upcoming meetings, participants continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate to achieve the committee’s objectives. participants judged that the committee needed to move to, and then maintain, a more restrictive policy stance in order to meet the committee’s legislative mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. many participants noted that, with inflation well above the committee’s 2 percent objective and showing little sign so far of abating, and with supply and demand imbalances in the economy continuing, they had raised their assessment of the path of the federal funds rate that would likely be needed to achieve the committee’s goals. participants judged that the pace and extent of policy rate increases would continue to depend on the implications of incoming information for the outlook for economic activity and inflation and on risks to the outlook. several participants noted that, particularly in the current highly uncertain global economic and financial environment, it would be important to calibrate the pace of further policy tightening with the aim of mitigating the risk of significant adverse effects on the economic outlook. participants observed that, as the stance of monetary policy tightened further, it would become appropriate at some point to slow the pace of policy rate increases while assessing the effects of cumulative policy adjustments on economic activity and inflation. many participants indicated that, once the policy rate had reached a sufficiently restrictive level, it likely would be appropriate to maintain that level for some time until there was compelling evidence that inflation was on course to return to the 2 percent objective. participants noted that, in keeping with the committee’s plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, balance sheet runoff had moved up to its maximum planned pace in september and would continue at that pace. they further observed that a significant reduction in the committee’s holdings of securities was in progress and that this process was contributing to the move to a restrictive policy stance. a couple of participants remarked that, after the process of balance sheet reduction was well under way, it would be appropriate for the committee to consider sales of agency mbs in order to enable suitable progress toward a longer-run soma portfolio composed primarily of treasury securities. in their assessment of the effects of policy actions and communications to date, participants concurred that the committee’s actions to raise expeditiously the target range for the federal funds rate demonstrated its resolve to lower inflation to 2 percent and to keep inflation expectations anchored at levels consistent with that longerrun goal. participants noted that the committee’s commitment to restoring price stability, together with its purposeful policy actions and communications, had contributed to a notable tightening of financial conditions over the past year that would likely help reduce inflation pressures by restraining aggregate demand. participants observed that this tightening had led to substantial increases in real interest rates across the maturity spectrum. most participants remarked that, although some interest-sensitive categories of spending—such as housing and business fixed investment—had already started to respond to the tightening of financial conditions, a sizable portion of economic activity had yet to display much response. they noted also that inflation had not yet responded appreciably to policy tightening and that a significant reduction in inflation would likely lag that page 10 federal open market committee  of aggregate demand. participants observed that a period of real gdp growth below its trend rate, very likely accompanied by some softening in labor market conditions, was required. they agreed that, by moving its policy purposefully toward an appropriately restrictive stance, the committee would help ensure that elevated inflation did not become entrenched and that inflation expectations did not become unanchored. these policy moves would therefore prevent the far greater economic pain associated with entrenched high inflation, including the even tighter policy and more severe restraint on economic activity that would then be needed to restore price stability. in light of the broad-based and unacceptably high level of inflation, the intermeeting news of higher-thanexpected inflation, and upside risks to the inflation outlook, participants remarked that purposefully moving to a restrictive policy stance in the near term was consistent with risk-management considerations. many participants emphasized that the cost of taking too little action to bring down inflation likely outweighed the cost of taking too much action. several participants underlined the need to maintain a restrictive stance for as long as necessary, with a couple of these participants stressing that historical experience demonstrated the danger of prematurely ending periods of tight monetary policy designed to bring down inflation. several participants observed that as policy moved into restrictive territory, risks would become more two-sided, reflecting the emergence of the downside risk that the cumulative restraint in aggregate demand would exceed what was required to bring inflation back to 2 percent. a few of these participants noted that this possibility was heightened by factors beyond the committee’s actions, including the tightening of monetary policy stances abroad and the weakening global economic outlook, that were also likely to restrain domestic economic activity in the period ahead. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators had pointed to modest growth in spending and production. members also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months and the unemployment rate had remained low. members agreed that inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. members observed that russia’s war against ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. they also agreed that the war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. members remarked that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. in their assessment of the monetary policy stance necessary for achieving the committee’s maximum-employment and price-stability goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 3 to 3¼ percent and anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate. in addition, members agreed that the committee would continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mbs, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet issued in may. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and that they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. they also noted that their assessments would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. members affirmed that the committee was strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective september 22, 2022, the federal open market committee directs the desk to:  undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 3 to 3¼ percent.  conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 3.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 3.05 percent and with a per-counterparty minutes of the meeting of september 20–21, 2022 page 11  limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair.  roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap.  reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month.  allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. russia’s war against ukraine is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. the war and related events are creating additional upward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. the committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. in taking this action, the board approved requests to establish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the federal reserve banks of boston, philadelphia, cleveland, richmond, atlanta, chicago, st. louis, kansas city, and dallas. this vote also encompassed approval by the board of governors of the establishment of a 3.25 percent primary credit rate by the remaining federal reserve banks, effective on the later 6 the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 3 to 3¼ percent and anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in may. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, james bullard, susan m. collins, lisa d. cook, esther l. george, philip n. jefferson, loretta j. mester, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 3.15 percent, effective september 22, 2022. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve a ¾ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 3.25 percent, effective september 22, 2022.6 of september 22, 2022, or the date such reserve banks inform the secretary of the board of such a request. (secretary’s note: subsequently, the federal reserve banks of new york, minneapolis, and san francisco were informed of the board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 3.25 percent, effective september 22, 2022.) page 12 federal open market committee  it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, november 1–2, 2022. the meeting adjourned at 10:20 a.m. on september 21, 2022. notation vote by notation vote completed on august 16, 2022, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on july 26–27, 2022.  james a. clouse secretary 
e november 2, 2022 chair powell. good afternoon. my colleagues and i are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. we have both the tools that we need and the resolve it will take to restore price stability on behalf of american families and businesses. price stability is the responsibility of the federal reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. in particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. today, the fomc raised our policy interest rate by 75 basis points. and we continue to anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate. we are moving our policy stance purposefully to a level that will be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent. in addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive stance of policy for some time. i will have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. the u.s. economy has slowed significantly from last year’s rapid pace. real gdp rose at a pace of 2.6 percent last quarter but is unchanged so far this year. recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production this quarter. growth in consumer spending has slowed from last year’s rapid pace, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. activity in the housing sector has weakened significantly, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remains extremely tight, with the unemployment rate at a 50-year low, job vacancies still very high, and wage growth elevated.  job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 289,000 jobs per month over august and september. although job vacancies have moved below their highs and the pace of job gains has slowed from earlier in the year, the labor market continues to be out of balance, with demand substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. the labor force participation rate is little changed since the beginning of the year. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. over the 12 months ending in september, total pce prices rose 6.2 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 5.1 percent. and the recent inflation data again have come in higher than expected. price pressures remain evident across a broad range of goods and services. russia’s war against ukraine has boosted prices for energy and food and has created additional upward pressure on inflation. despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. but that is not grounds for complacency; the longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective.  at today’s meeting, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points. and we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet, which plays an important role in firming the stance of monetary policy. with today’s action, we have raised interest rates by 3¾ percentage points this year. we anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. financial conditions have tightened significantly in response to our policy actions, and we are seeing the effects on demand in the most interest-rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, such as housing. it will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. that’s why we say in our statement that in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, we will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation. at some point—as i’ve said in the last two press conferences—it will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases as we approach the level of interest rates that will be sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal. there is significant uncertainty around that level of interest rates. even so, we still have some ways to go, and incoming data since our last meeting suggest that the ultimate level of interest rates will be higher than previously expected. our decisions will depend on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. we are taking forceful steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. reducing inflation  is likely to require a sustained period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices in the longer run. the historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. we will stay the course until the job is done. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you, and i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. colby. colby smith. thank you. colby smith with the financial times. on the need to slow the pace of rate increases at some point: is a downshift contingent on a string of better inflation data specifically between now and, let’s say, the december meeting? or is that something that the fed could potentially proceed with, independent of that data, given the lagged effects that you mentioned? chair powell. so a couple things on that. we do need to see inflation coming down decisively, and good evidence of that would be a series of down monthly readings. of course, that’s what we’d all love to see, but that’s—i’ve never thought of that as the appropriate test for slowing the pace of increases or for identifying the appropriately restrictive level that we’re aiming for. we need to bring our policy stance down to a level that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. how will we know that we’ve reached that level? well, we’ll take into account the full range of analysis and data that bear on that question, guided by our assessment of how much financial conditions have tightened, the effects that that tightening is actually having on the real economy and on inflation,  taking into consideration lags, as i mentioned. we will be looking at real rates, for example, all across the yield curve and all other financial conditions as we make that assessment. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. hi, howard schneider with reuters. i’m sure there’s going to be tons of confusion out there about whether this means you’re going to slow in december or not. would you say that the bias right now is not for another 75 basis point increase? chair powell. so, what i want to do is put that question of pace in the context of our broader tightening program, if i may, and talk about the statement language along the way. so i think you can think about our tightening program as really addressing three questions, the first of which was, and has been, how fast to go. the second is how high to raise our policy rate. and the third will be, eventually, how long to remain at a restrictive level. so on the first question—how fast to tighten policy—it’s been very important that we move expeditiously, and we have clearly done so. we’ve moved 3¾ percent since march, admittedly from a base of zero. it’s a historically fast pace, and that’s certainly appropriate given the persistence and strength in inflation and the low level from which we started. so now we come to the second question, which is how high to raise our policy rate. and we’re saying that we’d raise that rate to a level that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation to our 2 percent target over time, and we put that into our postmeeting statement because that really does become the important question, we think now, is how far to go. and i’ll talk more about that. we think there’s some ground to cover before we meet that test, and that’s why we say that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate. and, as i mentioned, incoming data between the meetings, both a strong labor market report but particularly the cpi report, do suggest to me that  we may ultimately move to higher levels than we thought at the time of the september meeting. that level is very uncertain, though, and i would say we’re going to find it over time. of course, with the lags between policy and economic activity, there’s a lot of uncertainty, so we note that in determining the pace of future increases, we’ll take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy as well as the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation. so i would say, as we come closer to that level, move more into restrictive territory, the question of speed becomes less important than the second and third questions. and that’s why i’ve said at the last two press conferences that at some point, it will become appropriate to slow the pace of increases. so that time is coming, and it may come as soon as the next meeting or the one after that. no decision has been made. it is likely we’ll have a discussion about this at the next meeting, a discussion. to be clear, let me say again [that] the question of when to moderate the pace of increases is now much less important than the question of how high to raise rates and how long to keep monetary policy restricted, which really will be our principal focus. howard schneider. if i could follow up on that, to what degree was there an importance or weight given to a need to signal this possibility now, given all the concerns, really around the globe, about fed policy sort of driving ahead and everybody else dealing with their own stress as a result? chair powell. well, i think i’m pleased that we have moved as fast as we have. i don’t think we’ve overtightened. i think there’s—very difficult to make a case that our current level is too tight, given that inflation still runs well above the federal funds rate. so i think that at this meeting, as in the last two meetings, as i’ve mentioned, i’ve said that we—that there would come a point, and this was a meeting at which we had a discussion about what that might  mean. and we did discuss this, and, as i mentioned, we’ll discuss it again in december. but there’s no—i don’t have any sense that we’ve overtightened or moved too fast. i think it’s been good and a successful program that we’ve gotten this far this fast. remember, though, that we still think there’s a need for ongoing rate increases, and we have some ground left to cover here, and cover it we will. michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. chair powell, core pce inflation on a 3- or 6-month annualized basis and on a 12-month basis has been running in the high 4s, close to 5 percent. is there any reason to think you won’t have to raise rates at least above that level to be confident that you are imparting enough restraint to bring inflation down? chair powell. so this is the question of, does the policy rate need to get above the inflation rate? and i would say, there are a range of views on it. that’s the classic “taylor principle” view. but i would think you’d look more at a forward, a forward-looking measure of inflation to look at that. but i think the answer is, we’ll want to get the policy rate to a level where it is, where the real interest rate is positive. we will want to do that. i do not think of it as the single and only touchstone, though. i think you put some weight on that; you also put some weight on rates across the curve. very few people borrow at the short end—at the federal funds rate, for example. so households and businesses, if they’re [borrowing]—[there are] very meaningfully positive interest rates all across the curve for them, credit spreads are larger, so borrowing rates are significantly higher, and i think financial conditions have tightened quite a bit. so i would look at that as an important feature. i’d put some weight on it, but i wouldn’t say it’s something that is the single, dominant thing to look at.  nick timiraos. if i could follow up: what is your best assessment, or the staff’s best assessment right now, of the current rate of underlying inflation? chair powell. i don’t have a specific number for you there. there are many, many models that look at that. and, i mean, one way to look at it is that it’s a pretty stationary object and that when inflation runs—above that level, for sure—substantially above for some time, you’ll see it move up, but the movement will be fairly gradual. so i think that’s what the principal models would tend to say. but i wouldn’t want to land on any one assessment. there are many different—as you know, many different people publish an assessment of underlying inflation. nick timiraos. thank you. michelle smith. jeanna. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thank you for taking our questions. jeanna smialek with the new york times. i wondered, do you see any evidence at this stage that inflation is, or is at risk of becoming, entrenched? chair powell. is inflation becoming entrenched? so i guess i would start by pointing to expectations. so if we saw longer-term expectations moving up, that would be very troubling. and they were moving up a little bit at the middle part of this year, and they’ve moved now back down. that’s one piece of data. shorter-term inflation expectations moved up between the last meeting and this meeting, and we don’t think those are as indicative, but they may be important in the wage-setting process. there’s a school of thought that believes that. so that’s very concerning. i guess the other thing i would say is that the longer we have—we’re now 18 months into this episode of high inflation, and we don’t have a clearly identified, scientific way of  understanding at what point inflation becomes entrenched. and so the thing we need to do from a risk-management standpoint is to use our tools forcefully but thoughtfully and get inflation under control—get it down to 2 percent—get it behind us. that’s what we really need to do and what we’re strongly committed to doing. michelle smith. rachel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. thank you for taking our questions. rachel siegel from the washington post. the statement points to lag times. i’m wondering if you can walk us through how you judge those lag effects, what that timeline looks like over the coming months or even a year, and where you would expect it to show up in different parts of the economy. chair powell. so the way i would think about that is, it’s commonly, for a long time, thought that monetary policy works with “long and variable lags,” and that it works first on financial conditions and then on economic activity and then perhaps later than that even on inflation. so that’s been the thinking for a long time. there was an old literature that made those lags out to be fairly long. there’s newer literature that says that they’re shorter. the truth is, we don’t have a lot of data [consisting] of inflation of [rates] this high in what is, now, the modern economy. one big difference now is that it used to be that you would raise the federal funds rate, financial conditions would react, and then that would affect economic activity and inflation. now financial conditions react well before in expectation of monetary policy [actions]. that’s the way it has moved for a quarter of a century—in the direction of financial conditions, then monetary policy—because the markets are thinking, what is the central bank going to do? and there are plenty of economists that also think that once financial conditions change, that the effects on the economy are actually faster than they would have been before. we don’t know  that. i guess the thing that i would say is: it’s highly uncertain—highly uncertain. and so from a risk-management standpoint—but we do need, it would be irresponsible not to, to ignore them. but you want to consider them but not take them literally. so i think it’s a very difficult place to be, but i would tend to be—want to be in the middle looking carefully at what’s actually happening with the economy and trying to make good decisions from a risk-management standpoint, remembering, of course, that if we were to overtighten, we could then use our tools strongly to support the economy, whereas if we don’t get inflation under control because we don’t tighten enough, now we’re in a situation where inflation will become entrenched and the costs, the employment costs in particular, will be much higher potentially. so from a risk- management standpoint, we want to be sure that we don’t make the mistake of either failing to tighten enough or loosening policy too soon. rachel siegel. and if i could follow up: should we interpret the addition to the statement to mean that more weight is put into those lag effects than they would have been after previous rate hikes? chair powell. i think as we move now into restrictive territory, as we make these ongoing rate hikes and policy becomes more restrictive, it’ll be appropriate now to be thinking more about lags. of course, we think about lags—the lags are just sort of a basic part of monetary policy. but we will be thinking about them, but we won’t be—i think we’ll be considering them but because it’s appropriate to do so. let me say this: it is very premature to be thinking about pausing. so people, when they hear lags, they think about a pause. it’s very premature, in my view, to think about or be talking about pausing our rate hike. we have a ways to go. our policy—we need ongoing rate hikes to get to that level of sufficiently restrictive. and we don’t—of course, we don’t really know exactly where that is. we have a sense, and  we’ll write down in september—sorry, in the december meeting, a new summary of economic projections, which updates that. but i would expect us to continue to update it based on what we’re seeing with incoming data. michelle smith. neil irwin. neil irwin. thanks, chair powell. neil irwin, axios. as you look around the economy, the clearest impact of your tightening so far has been on housing, maybe some venture-funded tech companies. it’s been relatively narrow in terms of the labor market, consumer demand; a lot of sectors, you don’t see a ton of effect. is the pathway and channels through which monetary policy works changing? is it narrower than it used to be? and on housing in particular, are you at all worried that you’re cramping housing supply in ways that might cause problems down the road? chair powell. i don’t know that the channels through which policy works have changed that much. i would say a big channel is the labor market, and the labor market is very, very strong. very strong. and households, of course, have strong balance sheets. so we go into this with a strong labor market and excess demand in the labor market, as you can see through many different things, and also with households who have strong spending power built up. so it may take time, it may take resolve, it may take patience. it’s likely to, to get inflation down. it may—i think you see, from our forecasts and others, that it will take some time for inflation to come down. it’ll take time, we think. so, sorry, was i getting to your question there? neil irwin. housing. chair powell. oh, housing—the housing part of it. yes, so we look at housing—of course, housing is significantly affected by these higher rates, which are really back where they were before the global financial crisis—they’re not historically high, but they’re much higher  than they’ve been. and you’re seeing housing activity decline, and you’re seeing housing prices growing at a faster rate and, in some parts of the country, declining. you know, i would say housing was—the housing market was very overheated for the couple of years after the pandemic as demand increased and rates were low. we all know the stories of how overheated the housing market was, prices going up. many, many bidders and no conditions, that kind of thing. so the housing market needs to get back into a balance between supply and demand. we’re well aware of what’s going on there. from a financial stability standpoint, we didn’t see in this cycle the kinds of poor credit underwriting that we saw before the global financial crisis. housing credit was very carefully—much more carefully managed by the lenders. so it’s a very different situation and doesn’t present potential financial—doesn’t appear to present financial stability issues. but, no, we do understand that that’s really where a very big effect of our policy is. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi, victoria guida with politico. i wanted to ask about the labor market. you mentioned early on, again, that job openings are very high compared to available workers, and i’m just curious to what extent you do and don’t draw signal from that. so, for example, if wage growth is slowing and if maybe the unemployment rate starts to tick up, will that make you sort of decrease your focus on job openings? what do you see—are wages what’s really important? how are you thinking about the labor market as it relates to inflation? chair powell. so we talk a lot about vacancies in the—vacancy-to-unemployed rate, but it’s just one, it’s just another data series. it’s been unusually important in this cycle because it’s been so out of line. but so has quits. so have wages. so we look at a very wide range of data on the unemployment—on the labor market. so i’d start with unemployment,  which is typically the single statistic you would look to, is at a 50-year low, 3½ percent. we’re getting really nothing in labor supply now. we had, i think, very small increase this year, which we had really thought, we thought we would get that back. most analysts thought we would get some labor supply coming in. you mentioned wages, so i guess i would characterize that as sort of a mixed picture. it’s true, with average hourly earnings, you see—so i would call it a flattening out at a level that’s well above the level that would be consistent over time with 2 percent inflation, assuming a reasonable productivity. with the eci reading this week, again, a mixed picture. the headline number was a disappointment. let’s just say it was high. it didn’t show a decline. there’s some rays of light inside that if you look at private-sector workers—that did come down, that compensation did come down. overall, though, the broader picture is of an overheated labor market where demand substantially exceeds supply. job creation still exceeds sort of the level that would hold the market where it is. so that’s the picture. do we see—we keep looking for signs that sort of the beginning of a gradual softening is happening. and maybe that’s there, but it’s not obvious to me, because wages aren’t coming down—they’re just moving sideways at an elevated level, both eci and average hourly earnings. we want to see—we would love to see vacancies coming down, quits coming down. they are coming down. vacancies are below their all-time high but not by as much as we thought, because—and the data series is volatile, we never take any one reading, we always look at two or three. so it’s a mixed picture. i don’t see the case for real softening just yet. but we look at, i guess as i just showed you, we look at a very broad range of data on the labor market. victoria guida. so do you see wages as being a significant driver of inflation?  chair powell. i think wages have an effect on inflation and inflation has an effect on wages. i think that’s always been the case. there’s always—going back and forth, the question is, is that really elevated right now? i don’t think so. i don’t think wages are the principal story of why prices are going up. i don’t think that. i also don’t think that we see a wage–price spiral, but, again, it’s not something you can—once you see it, you’re in trouble. so we don’t want to see it. we want wages to go up—we just want them to go up at a level that’s sustainable and consistent with 2 percent inflation. and we think we can—we do think that, given the data that we have, that this labor market can soften without having to soften as much as history would indicate through the unemployment channel. it can soften through job openings declining. we think there’s room for that. but we won’t know that—that’ll be, that’ll be discovered empirically. kayla tausche. thank you so much. kayla tausche from cnbc. earlier last month, the united nations warned that there could be a global recession if central banks didn’t change course. the new u.k. prime minister warned of a profound economic crisis there. and i’m wondering how the fed is weighing international developments in light of a very strong economy here in the u.s. that would seem to be bucking those trends. chair powell. so, of course, we, we keep close tabs on economic developments and also geopolitical developments that are relevant to the economy abroad. we’re in very frequent contact with our foreign counterparts both through the imf meetings and the regular meetings with central banks that we have, and i have one this weekend with many, many central bankers. so we’re in touch with all of that. so i guess what—it’s clearly a time, a difficult time in the global economy. we’re seeing very high inflation in europe, significantly because of high energy prices related to the war in ukraine. and we’re seeing china’s having issues with the  zero-covid policy and much slower growth than we’re used to seeing. so we’re seeing—we see those difficulties. the strong dollar is a challenge for some countries. but we haven’t—we take all of that into account in our models. we think about the spillovers and that sort of thing. here in the united states, we have a strong economy, and we have an economy where inflation is running at 5 percent. core pce inflation—which is a really good indicator of what’s going on for us, the way we see it—is running at 5.1 percent on a 12-month basis and sort of similar to that on a 3-, 6-, and 9-month basis. so we know that we need to use our tools to get inflation under control. the world’s not going to be better off if we fail to do that. that’s a task we need to do. price stability in the united states is a good thing for the global economy over a long period of time. price stability is the kind of thing that pays dividends for our economy—for decades, hopefully—even though it may be difficult to get it back. getting it back is something that gives—that provides value to the people we serve for the long run. kayla tausche. if i could just follow up up on that—thank you. the fed has acknowledged in the past that the tools that you have don’t affect things like energy and food prices that stem from some of those conflicts overseas, and they’re some of the biggest pain points for consumers. so as you pursue the current path that you’ve outlined, is there a risk that some of those prices simply don’t come down? chair powell. so we don’t directly affect, for the most part, food and energy prices, but the demand channel does affect them just at the margin. the thing about the united states is that we also have strong—in many other jurisdictions, the principal problem really is energy. in the united states, we also have a demand issue. we’ve got an imbalance between demand and supply, which you see in many parts of the economy. so our tools are well suited to work on that problem, and that’s what we’re doing. you’re right, though. we don’t—the price of oil is  set globally, and it’s not something we can affect. i think by the actions that we take, though, we help keep longer-term inflation expectations anchored and keep the public believing in 2 percent inflation by the things that we do, even in times when energy is part of the story of why inflation is high. michelle smith. jonnelle. jonnelle marte. hi, chair powell. jonnelle marte with bloomberg. so the fed is facing two more ethics-related incidents with the revision of the financial statements from president bostic and president bullard speaking at a closed event. so some senators, like elizabeth warren, are saying that this is a sign of greater ethics problems at the fed. could you talk about what this does to the public’s trust in the bank and what the fed is doing to prevent this kind of behavior from becoming common? chair powell. sure. so you’re right—the public’s trust is really the fed’s and any central bank’s most important asset, and any time one of us, one of the policymakers, violates or falls short of those rules, we do risk undermining that trust, and we take that very seriously. we do. so at the beginning of our meeting yesterday, actually, we had a committee discussion of the full committee on the importance of holding ourselves individually and collectively accountable for knowing and following the high standard that’s set out in our existing rules with respect to both personal investment activities and external communications. and we’ve taken a number of steps, and i would just say we do understand how important those issues are. i would say that our new investment program that we have is up now and running, and, actually, it was through that that the problems with president bostic’s disclosures were discovered, when he filed his new disclosure. we now have a central group here at the board of governors that looks into disclosures and follows them and approves people’s disclosures and also all of their trades. any  trade anyone has to make is covered, has to be approved, preapproved, and there’s a lag—it has to be preapproved 45 days before it happens, so there’s no ability to game markets. so it’s a really good system. it worked here. and we—i think we all said to each other today— yesterday, actually, yesterday morning, we recommitted to each other and to this institution to hold ourselves to the highest standards and avoid these problems. jonnelle marte. do you have an update on the investigations that are pending? chair powell. i don’t. so, as you know, i referred the matter concerning president bostic to the inspector general, and once that happens, i don’t discuss it with the inspector general or with anybody. it’s just—the inspector general has, he has the ability to do investigations. we don’t really have that. so that’s what he’s doing. michelle smith. michael. michael mckee. michael mckee from bloomberg television and radio. earlier this year, you touted the three-month bill yield out to 18 months as the yield curve with 100 percent explanatory power. and you said, quote, “if it’s inverted, that means the fed’s going to cut, which means the economy is weak.” that curve is only 2 basis points away from inversion now, so i’m wondering why you are so confident that you have not overtightened, particularly given that rates work with a lag. chair powell. well, so we do monitor the near-term forward spread—you’re right. and it’s—that’s been our preferred measure. we think, just empirically, it dominates the ones that people tend to look at, which is 2s, 10s, and things like that. so it’s not inverted. and, also, you have to look at why things—why the rate curve is doing what it’s doing. it can be doing that because it affects—it expects cuts or because it expects inflation to come down. in this case, if you’re in a situation where the markets are pricing in significant declines in inflation, that’s  going to affect the forward curve. so, yes, we monitor it. you’re right. and that’s what i would say. michael mckee. if i could follow up: you also said several meetings ago that the risk of doing too little outweighed the risk of doing too much. is what you’re trying to tell us today is that that risk assessment has changed a little bit? chair powell. well, what’s happened is, time has passed, and we’ve raised interest rates by 375 basis points. i would not—i would not change a word in that statement, though. i think until we get inflation down, you’ll be hearing that from me. again, if we overtighten—and we don’t want to, we want to get this exactly right—but if we overtighten, then we have the ability with our tools, which are powerful, to, as we showed at the beginning of the pandemic episode, we can support economic activity strongly if that happens, if that’s necessary. on the other hand, if you make the mistake in the other direction and you let this drag on, then it’s a year or two down the road, and you’re realizing, inflation behaving the way it can, you’re realizing you didn’t actually get it, you have to go back in. by then, the risk, really, is that it has become entrenched in people’s thinking. and the record is that the employment costs—the cost to the people that we don’t want to hurt—they go up with the passage of time. that’s really how i look at it. so that isn’t going to change. what has changed, though—you’re right—is, we’re farther along now. and i think as we’re farther along, we’re now focused on that. what’s the place, what’s the level we need to get to rates? and i don’t know what we’ll do when we get there, by the way. it doesn’t—we’ll have to see. there’s been no decision or discussion around exactly what steps we would take at that point. but the first thing is to find your way there. michelle smith. chris rugaber.  christopher rugaber. thank you. chris rugaber at associated press. just to go back to housing for a minute: you mentioned the impact that rate increases have had on housing—home sales are down 25 percent in the past year, and so forth—but none of this is really showing up in, as you know, in the government’s inflation measures. and as we go forward, private real-time data is clearly showing these hits to housing. are you going to need to put a greater weight on that in order to ascertain things like whether there’s overtightening going on, or will you still focus as much on the more lagging government indicators? chair powell. so this is an interesting subject. so i start by saying, i guess, that the measure that’s in the cpi and the pce, it captures rents for all tenants, not just new leases. and that makes sense, actually, because for that reason—conceptually, that is—that’s sort of the right target for monetary policy. and the same thing is true for owners’ equivalent rent, which comes off of—it’s a reweighting of tenant rents. the private measures are, of course, good at picking up, at the margin, the new leases, and they tell you a couple things. one thing is, i think right now, if you look at the pattern of that series of the new leases, it’s very pro-cyclical, so rents went up much more than the cpi and pce rents did. and now they’re coming down faster. but what you’re—the implication is that there are still, as people, as non-new leases roll over and expire, right, they’re still in the pipeline, there’s still some significant rate increases coming, okay? but at some point, once you get through that, the new leases are going to tell you—what they’re telling you is, there will come a point at which rent inflation will start to come down. but that point is well out from where we are now. so we’re well aware of that, of course, and we look at it. but i would say that in terms of—the right way to think about inflation, really, is to look at the measure that we do look at, but considering that we also know that at some point, you’ll see rents coming down.  christopher rugaber. great, and just a quick follow. it looks like stock and bond markets are reacting positively to your announcement so far. is that something you wanted to see? is that a problem or what—how that might affect your future policy to see this positive reaction? chair powell. we’re not targeting any one or two particular things. our message should be—what i’m trying to do is make sure that our message is clear, which is that we think we have a ways to go, we have some ground to cover with interest rates before we get to, before we get to that level of interest rates that we think is sufficiently restrictive. and putting that in the statement and identifying that as a goal is an important step. and that’s meant to put that question, really, as the important one now, going forward. i’ve also said that we think that the level of rates that we estimated in september—the incoming data suggests that that’s actually going to be higher, and that’s been the pattern. i mean, i would have little confidence that the forecast—if we made a forecast today, if we were doing an sep today, the pattern has been that, one after another, they go up, and that’ll end when it ends, but there’s no sense that inflation is coming down. if you look at the—i have a table of the last 12 months of 12-month readings, and there’s really no pattern there. we’re exactly where we were a year ago. so i would also say, it’s premature to discuss pausing. and it’s not something that we’re thinking about. that’s really not a conversation to be had now. we have a ways to go. and the last thing i’ll say is that i would want people to understand our commitment to getting this done and to not making the mistake of not doing enough or the mistake of withdrawing our strong policy and doing that too soon. so those—i control those messages, and that’s my job.  michelle smith. edward. edward lawrence. edward lawrence with fox business. thank you, fed chairman. so how big of a headwind is all the fiscal spending to what the federal reserve’s trying to do to get inflation back to the 2 percent target? chair powell. in theory, it was a headwind this year, but i do think the broader context is that you have households that have these significant amounts of savings and can keep spending even in—so i think those two things do tend to wage—to sort of counterbalance each other out. it appears, consumer spending is still positive—it’s at pretty modest growth levels. it’s not shrinking. the banks that deal with retail customers and many retailers will tell you that the consumers are still buying and they’re still—they’re fine. so i don’t know how big the fiscal headwinds are, and they haven’t shown up in the way that we thought they would in restraining spending. so it must have to do with the savings that people have. edward lawrence. so, what about the spending? there’s tens of billions yet to be spent, i mean, from the inflation reduction act, the american rescue plan, chips act, bipartisan infrastructure bill. how does that play into your thinking about the future? chair powell. demand is going to have some support from those savings and also from the strong demand that’s still in the labor market. we still see pretty significant demand and a tightening labor market in some respects, although i think, overall, i would say it’s not really tightening or loosening. so we see those things, and what those things tell us is that our job is going to require some resolve and some patience over time. we’re going to have to stick with this. and that’s just—we take all that as a given, but we know what our objective is, and we know what our tools can do, and that’s how we think about it. michelle smith. thanks. we’ll go to nancy for the last question.  nancy marshall-genzer. hi, chair powell. nancy marshall-genzer from marketplace. i’m wondering, has the window for a soft landing narrowed? do you still think it’s possible? chair powell. has it narrowed? yes. is it still possible? yes. we’ve always said it was going to be difficult, but i think to the extent rates have to go higher and stay higher for longer, it becomes harder to see the path—it’s narrowed. i would say the path has narrowed over the course of the last year, really. hard to say. hard to say. again, i would say that the sort of array of data in the labor market is highly unusual and, to many economists, there is a path to— ordinarily there’s a relationship to gdp going down and vacancies declining, translating into unemployment, or there’s okun’s law. so all those things are relationships that are in the data, and they’re very real. data’s a little bit different this time, though, because you have this tremendously high level of vacancies and, we think, on a very steep part of the beveridge curve. all i would say is that the job losses may turn out to be less than would be indicated by those traditional measures, because job openings are so elevated and because the labor market is so strong. again, that’s going to be something we discover empirically. i think no one knows whether there’s going to be a recession or not and, if so, how bad that recession would be. and our job is to restore price stability so that we can have a strong labor market that benefits all over time. and that’s what we’re going to do. nancy marshall-genzer. just real quickly—why do you feel like the window has narrowed? chair powell. because we haven’t seen inflation coming down. the implication of inflation not coming down. what we would expect by now to have seen is that as the—really, as the supply-side problems have resolved themselves, we would have expected goods inflation to  come down by now, long since by now. and it really hasn’t. actually, it has come down, but not to the extent that we had hoped. at the same time, now you see services inflation, core services inflation moving up, and i just think that the inflation picture has become more and more challenging over the course of this year, without question. that means that we have to have policy be more restrictive, and that narrows the path to a soft landing, i would say. thanks very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 3 attended opening remarks for tuesday session only.  page 2 federal open market committee eric c. engstrom, associate director, division of monetary affairs, board julie ann remache, policy and market monitoring head, federal reserve bank of new york jon faust, senior special adviser to the chair, division of board members, board linda robertson, assistant to the board, division of board members, board andrew figura, associate director, division of research and statistics, board argia m. sbordone, research department head, federal reserve bank of new york glenn follette, associate director, division of research and statistics, board samuel schulhofer-wohl, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of dallas etienne gagnon, assistant director, division of monetary affairs, board chiara scotti, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board joshua gallin, senior special adviser to the chair, division of board members, board seth searls,2 associate director, federal reserve bank of new york michael s. gibson, director, division of supervision and regulation, board nitish ranjan sinha, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board david glancy, principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board paul a. smith, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board gustavo a. suarez, assistant director, division of research and statistics, board matteo iacoviello, senior associate director, division of international finance, board paula tkac, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of atlanta jane e. ihrig, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board jeffrey d. walker,2 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board michael t. kiley, deputy director, division of financial stability, board andreas lehnert, director, division of financial stability, board kurt f. lewis, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board laura lipscomb, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board mark meder, first vice president, federal reserve bank of cleveland ann e. misback, secretary, office of the secretary, board fernanda nechio, vice president, federal reserve bank of san francisco edward nelson, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board michael g. palumbo, senior associate director, division of research and statistics, board andrea raffo, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of minneapolis donielle a. winford, information manager, division of monetary affairs, board paul r. wood, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board rebecca zarutskie, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board committee ethics discussion the chair began with a discussion of ethical standards and acknowledged the great privilege and heavy responsibility that come with being entrusted to make policy decisions. there was agreement that the federal reserve can be effective only when there is a foundation of public trust. participants reaffirmed the importance of holding themselves and their staffs accountable for knowing and following the high ethical standards that are set in the committee’s policies, including those on financial transactions and disclosure and on external communications. developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager pro tem turned first to a discussion of financial market developments in the united states. over  minutes of the meeting of november 1–2, 2022 page 3 the period, financial conditions had tightened amid elevated volatility across financial markets. the market-implied path of the policy rate rose, with the median federal funds rate values in the september summary of economic projections and other federal reserve communications being viewed by market participants as indicating a commitment to sustaining a restrictive monetary policy stance. with data received over the period also indicating higher-than-expected core inflation, market participants placed high odds on a 75 basis point increase in the target range at the current meeting. nonetheless, contacts were increasingly focused on the question of when the committee might slow the pace of future increases in light of the substantial tightening of financial conditions that had occurred over the year. most respondents to the open market desk’s surveys viewed a 50 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate at the december meeting as the most likely outcome. on net, nominal treasury yields ended the period higher, reflecting both an upward revision in the expected path of the policy rate and higher estimated term premiums. investment-grade bond yields and mortgage interest rates moved up as well, to the highest levels in many years. the manager pro tem turned next to a discussion of volatility in global financial markets. in september, an expansionary budget announced by the u.k. government resulted in an extraordinary rise in yields on gilts (longdated u.k. government securities) and reduced gilt market liquidity. reflecting its financial stability objective, the bank of england initiated a temporary gilt purchase program designed to address disorderly market conditions. these purchases and a subsequent cancellation of some announced expansionary u.k. budgetary measures resulted in a retracement of much of the earlier increase in gilt yields. elevated volatility in international financial markets contributed to volatility in u.s. core fixed-income markets. in markets for u.s. treasury securities, some measures of market-implied volatility approached pandemic-era levels. spreads of yields on agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) over yields on treasury securities widened sharply, reflecting the sensitivity of these spreads to increased volatility. the increased volatility appeared to contribute to a decline in measures of market liquidity in core fixed-income markets, in particular around the period associated with u.k. volatility, but market functioning remained orderly. the foreign exchange value of the dollar appreciated further over the period. market participants perceived several asian economies as engaging in foreign exchange market interventions in response to rapid depreciations of local currencies. in the case of advanced economies, whose monetary policy tightening was well under way, market participants focused on communications perceived as signaling a potentially slower pace of policy rate increases in the period ahead. the manager pro tem turned next to developments in money markets and federal reserve operations. usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility remained fairly steady other than during the period surrounding quarter-end. in the period ahead, the relative pace of decline in on rrp facility balances and reserve balances would depend importantly on shifts in money market conditions. recent developments, including with regard to the relationship between on rrp facility balances and money market rates, suggested that, over time, conditions could evolve in a manner that would lead to falling usage of the on rrp facility. however, the manager pro tem noted that money market conditions could change somewhat more quickly in the lead-up to year-end because of normal factors, such as a treasury tax payment date in december that could increase the treasury general account balance, and year-end position adjustments. this prospect could require money market participants to be more responsive to shifting liquidity conditions and to plan ahead for the coming period. current market quotes suggested expectations of limited upward pressure on domestic money market rates around year-end. in offshore dollar funding markets, the premium associated with borrowing dollars was modestly higher than at similar points in previous years. regarding federal reserve net income, 11 reserve banks reported deferred assets totaling $6.3 billion in the latest h.4.1 statistical release, reflecting the negative net income stemming from rising interest expense. many other central banks also faced negative net income. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the november 1–2 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) had increased at a moderate pace in the third quarter after having declined over the first half of  page 4 federal open market committee the year. labor market conditions remained quite tight, and consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—remained elevated. in september, total nonfarm payroll employment posted a solid gain that was somewhat slower than the pace seen in recent months, and the unemployment rate declined 0.2 percentage point to 3.5 percent. the unemployment rate for african americans declined in september but was more than 2 percentage points above the national average; the unemployment rate for hispanics declined to a level that was 0.3 percentage point above the national measure. the labor force participation rate edged down in september, and the employment-to-population ratio was unchanged. the private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, moved lower, on net, from july to september but remained high. nominal wage growth continued to be rapid: average hourly earnings rose 5.0 percent over the 12 months ending in september, while the employment cost index (eci) of hourly compensation in the private sector, which also includes benefit costs, rose 5.2 percent over this period. however, the three-month change in the eci in september was noticeably lower than the average pace seen over the first half of the year. consumer price inflation remained elevated. total pce price inflation was 6.2 percent over the 12 months ending in september, and core pce inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 5.1 percent over the same period. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 4.7 percent in september. the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, was little changed in the third quarter but remained above pre-pandemic levels. real pce rose modestly in the third quarter. residential investment dropped further, however, and business fixed investment growth was held back by a decline in nonresidential structures investment. government purchases rose in the third quarter after having declined over the first half of the year. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit narrowed in the third quarter. net exports contributed positively to real gdp growth, as real exports stepped up while real imports declined. data pointed to weakening foreign economic activity in recent months, weighed down by the economic fallout of russia’s war against ukraine, headwinds in china, and tighter financial conditions. in many advanced foreign economies, high inflation and disruptions to energy supply contributed to a decline in real disposable incomes and depressed consumer and business confidence. in response, fiscal authorities in europe and japan announced packages intended to ease the burden of high inflation on consumers and businesses. in china, data indicated weaker momentum in economic activity and a further deterioration in the property market. weaker global demand has also resulted in a pronounced slowdown in manufacturing, which weighed on activity in export-oriented emerging market economies in asia. consumer price inflation rose further in october in many foreign economies, reflecting past increases in energy and food prices, but also a continued broadening of inflationary pressure within core prices. in response to high inflation, many central banks further tightened monetary policy, albeit at a slower pace in some cases. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, u.s. treasury yields and the market-implied federal funds rate path moved substantially higher. broad domestic equity prices were little changed, on net, amid high market volatility, while corporate bond yields increased notably. the rise in borrowing costs appeared to have slowed the volume of financing in many credit markets. credit quality remained sound overall, although there are some signs of deterioration for lower-rated borrowers. the expected path of the federal funds rate implied by a straight read of financial market quotes rose notably over the intermeeting period, largely reflecting more-restrictive-than-expected monetary policy communications and data releases that pointed to inflation moving down more slowly than previously expected. on net, nominal treasury yields increased across the maturity spectrum. the increases in nominal yields at mediumand longer-term horizons were primarily accounted for by higher real yields, though inflation compensation measures rose as well. broad equity price indexes fell significantly early in the intermeeting period, with inflation news and monetary policy expectations likely being the main drivers of stock price movements. however, equity prices later rebounded and ended the period essentially unchanged on net. one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—declined slightly, on net, but remained at the upper end of its range since mid-2020.  minutes of the meeting of november 1–2, 2022 page 5 conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period, with the september increase in the target range for the federal funds rate and the associated increases in the federal reserve’s administered rates passing through quickly to overnight money market rates. in secured markets, money market rates remained soft relative to the on rrp offering rate, attributed to subdued treasury bill supply, elevated demand for treasury collateral, and investor demand for very short-term assets amid uncertainty over the pace of policy rate increases. daily take-up in the on rrp facility remained elevated amid this softness in repurchase agreement rates. money market fund net yields rose along with the rise in administered rates, while retail bank deposit rates increased modestly on balance. foreign asset prices were volatile over the intermeeting period as investors grappled with the combination of a deteriorating global growth outlook and synchronous policy tightening undertaken by major central banks in response to high inflation. fiscal and political developments in the united kingdom added to market volatility but left little net imprint. on balance, sovereign bond yields in most advanced foreign economies rose modestly and equity prices were mixed. the u.s. dollar appreciated against most major currencies, driven by widening yield differentials between the united states and the rest of the world and further deterioration of the foreign growth outlook. the japanese yen weakened against the dollar, on net, even though japanese authorities intervened to support the yen. the chinese renminbi depreciated significantly against the dollar as continuation of the zero-covid policy and increased investor concerns about longer-term growth prospects weighed on the currency. investors continued to withdraw from dedicated emerging market economy and european funds amid further increases in u.s. treasury yields and concerns over foreign economic growth. in domestic credit markets, borrowing costs continued to rise over the intermeeting period. yields for corporate bonds and institutional leveraged loans increased. bank interest rates for commercial and industrial (c&i) loans continued the upward trend observed since the first quarter of 2022, while a rising proportion of small businesses reported facing increased borrowing costs in september. municipal bond yields increased across ratings categories. residential mortgage rates rose further in the period following the september fomc meeting, nearly reaching their highest levels since 2002. interest rates on existing credit card accounts continued to trend upward, reflecting increases in the federal funds rate that were quickly passed through to prime rates. credit continued to be generally available to businesses and households despite some signs of tightening lending standards in certain segments, but high borrowing costs reduced the demand for credit in many markets. issuance of corporate bonds, although quite strong in early september, slowed significantly in late september and october. gross institutional leveraged loan issuance declined in september. equity issuance and gross issuance of municipal bonds remained weak in september and october. business loans at banks continued to expand in september but at a slower pace than observed in past months. in the october senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported having tightened c&i and commercial real estate (cre) lending standards over the previous three months. meanwhile, issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) also slowed amid higher spreads. credit appeared to remain generally available to most small businesses, though the share of small firms reporting that it was more difficult to obtain loans than three months ago continued its upward trend in september. credit remained available in the residential mortgage market for borrowers who are able to pay high interest rates. the number of home-purchase and refinance mortgage originations were about flat in august and september but down significantly from late last year. consumer credit remained available for most borrowers in july and august, with auto credit and credit card credit growing at a robust pace. however, banks in the october sloos reported being less likely to approve auto and credit card loans to subprime and near-prime borrowers compared with earlier this year. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations showed signs of deterioration in some sectors but remained generally solid overall. the volume of corporate bond rating upgrades was roughly on par with that of downgrades in september. however, upgrades were concentrated in the investment-grade segment; in the speculative-grade segment, downgrades outpaced upgrades, and market-implied expectations of defaults over the next year increased markedly. default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans rose slightly from low levels. the credit quality of c&i and cre loans on banks’ balance sheets also remained sound. delinquency rates for cre loans in non-agency cmbs pools ticked up in september, as did indicators of future payment stress. delinquency rates on small business loans remained quite low, and the credit quality of municipal securities remained strong.  page 6 federal open market committee the credit quality of most households also appeared to remain solid. delinquencies on residential mortgage loans continued to trend down, and the share of mortgages in foreclosure in august remained close to prepandemic levels. available data through the second quarter indicated that credit card and auto credit delinquency rates continued to rise; however, delinquencies for auto loans were near their pre-pandemic levels, and those for credit cards remained well below pre-pandemic levels. the staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system. the staff noted that respondents to the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of near-term risks judged that economic, financial, and geopolitical risks had risen across the globe. amid this weaker outlook and higher interest rates, prices of risky assets generally fell, though real estate valuations remained elevated. household borrowing was moderate, and mortgage performance remained strong. nonfinancial businesses’ leverage continued to decline, and interest coverage ratios continued to increase; however, further increases in borrowing costs could pose risks to some borrowers’ ability to service their debts. in the financial sector, the results of this year’s stress test demonstrated that large banks remain resilient to a substantial economic downturn, but there were indicators of elevated leverage at hedge funds and other nonbank financial institutions. short-term funding markets continued to have structural vulnerabilities. funding risks at domestic banks remained low, but prime money market funds, other cash-investment vehicles, open-end mutual funds, and stablecoins all continued to be susceptible to disruptive redemptions. staff economic outlook the projection for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the november fomc meeting was weaker than the september forecast. broad financial conditions were expected to be considerably more restrictive over the projection period than in september, reflecting both recent market moves and upward revisions to the staff’s assumptions regarding the future course of monetary policy based on recent federal reserve communications. as a result, output was expected to move below the staff’s estimate of potential early in 2024 and to remain below potential in 2025. likewise, the unemployment rate was expected to be above the staff’s estimate of its natural rate in 2024 and 2025. on a 12-month change basis, total pce price inflation was expected to be 5.3 percent in 2022 and core inflation was expected to be 4.6 percent. the staff raised their projection for core pce price inflation in coming quarters, reflecting their assessment that the factors that had boosted inflation since the middle of last year—most notably, strong wage growth and the effect of supply constraints on prices—would persist for longer than previously thought. with the effects of supply–demand imbalances in goods markets expected to unwind and labor and product markets expected to become less tight, the staff continued to project that inflation would decline markedly over the next two years; in 2025, both total and core pce price inflation were expected to be 2 percent. with inflation remaining stubbornly high, the staff continued to view the risks to the inflation projection as skewed to the upside. for real activity, sluggish growth in real private domestic spending, a deteriorating global outlook, and tightening financial conditions were all seen as salient downside risks to the projection for real activity; in addition, the possibility that a persistent reduction in inflation could require a greater-than-assumed amount of tightening in financial conditions was seen as another downside risk. the staff, therefore, continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were skewed to the downside and viewed the possibility that the economy would enter a recession sometime over the next year as almost as likely as the baseline. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that recent indicators pointed to modest growth of spending and production. nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. participants recognized that russia’s war against ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. the war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. against this background, participants continued to be highly attentive to inflation risks. with regard to current economic activity and the nearterm outlook, participants observed that although real gdp rebounded in the third quarter, recent data suggested that economic activity in the near term appeared likely to expand at a pace below its trend growth rate. participants noted a softening in consumer and business spending growth, and some participants remarked that  minutes of the meeting of november 1–2, 2022 page 7 there had been a notable slowing in interest rate-sensitive sectors, particularly housing, in response to the tightening of financial conditions associated with the committee’s policy actions. with inflation remaining far too high and showing few signs of moderating, participants observed that a period of below-trend real gdp growth would be helpful in bringing aggregate supply and aggregate demand into better balance, reducing inflationary pressures, and setting the stage for the sustained achievement of the committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability. in their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that growth in consumer spending had softened recently. several participants remarked that there had been a reduction in discretionary expenditures, especially among lower- and middle-income households, whose purchases were shifting toward lower-cost options. participants observed that, in aggregate, household-sector balance sheets were still strong and that this factor would continue to support consumer spending. a few participants noted that some households had been running down the additional savings they had accumulated during the pandemic and that there were reports of a rise in the number of households experiencing financial strains. participants commented that higher mortgage interest rates had notably restrained housing activity. with regard to the business sector, participants noted that growth in investment spending was modest. several participants observed that business investment was being weighed down by tighter financial conditions, although a few participants reported that some business contacts indicated that their investment spending had been resilient. some participants mentioned reports received from business contacts of easing supply bottlenecks, reflected in declines in shipping costs and delivery times, although the reported extent of these improvements varied across contacts. a few participants remarked that, in instances in which supply constraints had eased, their business contacts found it easier to plan production or had diminished needs to maintain precautionary inventories. a couple of participants noted that drought conditions in the midwest were making some waterways, notably the mississippi river system, less navigable. these conditions were creating new supply constraints and putting upward pressures on transportation costs and prices for farm products. participants observed that, with inflation elevated globally, many central banks were tightening monetary policy simultaneously, contributing to an overall tightening of global financial conditions. participants further noted that the overall tightening of global financial conditions, along with energy prices and other headwinds, was contributing to a slowdown in the growth rate of global real gdp. participants remarked that the foreign economic slowdown, in combination with a strong u.s. dollar, was likely to weigh on the u.s. export sector, and several participants commented that there could be wider spillovers to the u.s. economy. participants observed that the labor market had remained very tight, with the unemployment rate near a historically low level, the number of job vacancies very high, a low pace of layoffs, robust employment gains, and elevated nominal wage growth. some participants remarked that employers in certain sectors, such as health care, leisure and hospitality, or construction, faced particularly acute labor shortages and that these shortages were contributing to especially strong wage pressures in those sectors. participants commented on the labor market having remained strong to date, even alongside the slowing in economic activity. a number of participants remarked that some businesses were keen to retain workers after their recent experiences of labor shortages and hiring challenges. these participants noted that this consideration had limited layoffs even as the broader economy had softened or that this behavior could limit layoffs if aggregate economic activity were to soften further. nevertheless, many participants noted tentative signs that the labor market might be moving slowly toward a better balance of supply and demand; these signs included a lower rate of job turnover and a moderation in nominal wage growth. participants anticipated that imbalances in the labor market would gradually diminish and that the unemployment rate would likely rise somewhat from its current very low level, while vacancies would likely fall. participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high and was well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. some participants noted that the burden of high inflation was falling disproportionally on low-income households, for whom necessities like food, energy, and shelter make up a larger share of expenditures. many participants observed that price pressures had increased in the services sector and that, historically, price pressures in this sector had been more persistent than those in the goods sector. some participants noted that the recent high pace of nominal wage growth, taken together with the recent low pace of productivity growth, would, if sustained, be inconsistent with achievement of the 2 percent inflation objective. several participants, however, commented on signs of a moderation in nom-  page 8 federal open market committee inal wage growth. participants agreed that near-term inflation pressures were high, but some noted that lower commodity prices or the expected reduced pressure on goods prices due to an easing of supply constraints should contribute to lower inflation in the medium term. several participants remarked that rent increases on new leases had been slowing in recent months, but participants also noted that it would take some time for this development to show up in pce inflation. several participants summarized reports provided by business contacts about their firms’ ability to pass on higher input costs to their customers. these reports suggested that some firms continued to have solid pricing power, while in other cases cost pass-through had become more difficult. participants remarked that, overall, measures of medium- and longer-term inflation expectations obtained from surveys of households and businesses as well as from financial markets quotes appeared to have remained well anchored. a couple of participants observed that longer-term inflation expectations were stable even as measures of near-term inflation expectations responded to realized inflation in line with historical patterns. participants noted that longer-term inflation expectations were an important influence on inflation’s behavior and stressed that the committee’s ongoing monetary policy tightening would be essential for ensuring that these expectations remained well anchored. several participants expressed the concern that the longer inflation remained well above the 2 percent goal, the greater the risk that longer-term inflation expectations could become unanchored. such a development, if it materialized, would make it much more costly to bring inflation down and to achieve the committee’s statutory objectives of maximum employment and price stability. a couple of participants discussed the high dispersion of longer-term inflation expectations across respondents in various surveys: these participants noted that the higher dispersion may signal increased uncertainty about the inflation outlook and was a reason not to be complacent about longer-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. participants discussed the length of the lags in the response of the economy to monetary policy actions, taking into account historical experience and the various estimates of timing relationships provided in economic research, as well as the high degree of uncertainty involved in applying the evidence on lags to the current situation. they noted that monetary policy tightening typically produced rapid effects on financial conditions but that the full effects of changes in financial conditions on aggregate spending and the labor market, and then on inflation, likely took longer to materialize. with regard to current circumstances, many participants remarked that, even though the tightening of monetary policy had clearly influenced financial conditions and had had notable effects in some interest rate-sensitive sectors, the timing of the effects on overall economic activity, the labor market, and inflation was still quite uncertain, with the full extent of the effects yet to be realized. several participants observed that, because of the difficulties in isolating the effects of monetary policy, changes in economic structure, or increasing transparency over time regarding monetary policy decisions, the historical record did not provide definitive evidence on the length of these lags. in addition, some participants noted that the post-pandemic dynamics of the economy may differ from those prevailing prior to the pandemic. participants generally noted that the uncertainty associated with their economic outlooks was high and that the risks to the inflation outlook remained tilted to the upside. participants observed that recent inflation had been higher and more persistent than anticipated. some participants noted the risk that energy prices could rise sharply again amid geopolitical tensions. a few participants commented that the ongoing tightness in the labor market could lead to an emergence of a wage–price spiral, even though one had not yet developed. a number of participants judged that the risks regarding the outlook for economic activity were weighted to the downside, with various global headwinds being prominently cited. these global headwinds included a slowdown in economic activity occurring in china and the ongoing international economic implications of russia’s war against ukraine. participants observed that, because of high inflation pressures prevailing globally, monetary policy tightening was under way in many other economies—a development likely to affect foreign economic activity and carrying the potential for spillovers to the u.s. economy. in their discussion of issues related to financial stability, participants noted the importance of orderly functioning of the market for u.s. treasury securities for the transmission of monetary policy, for meeting the financing needs of the federal government, and for the operation of the global financial system. participants observed that, despite elevated interest rate volatility and indications of strained liquidity conditions, the functioning of the treasury securities market had been orderly. noting that the value of resilience of the market for treasury  minutes of the meeting of november 1–2, 2022 page 9 securities was underlined by recent gilt market disruptions in the united kingdom, a number of participants discussed a range of issues that could be considered by the appropriate authorities regarding market resilience, including potential interactions of capital and liquidity regulations with market activity, oversight of key market participants, clearing and settlement practices, and the role and structure of the federal reserve’s standing facilities. a few participants noted the importance of being prepared to address disruptions in u.s. core market functioning in ways that would not affect the stance of monetary policy, especially during episodes of monetary policy tightening. several participants noted the risks posed by nonbank financial institutions amid the rapid global tightening of monetary policy and the potential for hidden leverage in these institutions to amplify shocks. in their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants concurred that inflation remained well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent and the recent data on inflation provided very few signs that inflation pressures were abating. the economic expansion had slowed significantly from last year’s rapid pace, and recent indicators pointed to modest growth in spending and production in the current quarter. despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remained extremely tight, and nominal wage growth remained elevated. against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 75 basis points at this meeting and to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that the committee issued in may. participants observed that the policy rate hike at this meeting was another step toward making the committee’s monetary policy stance sufficiently restrictive to help ease supply and demand imbalances and to return inflation to 2 percent over time. in their discussion of the effects of monetary policy actions and communications to date, participants concurred that the committee had taken forceful steps to moderate aggregate demand in order to bring it into better alignment with aggregate supply. financial conditions had tightened significantly in response to the committee’s policy actions, and their effects were clearly evident in the most interest rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, including residential investment and some components of business investment. several participants commented that monetary policy actions and communications had helped keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored—a situation that would help facilitate the return of inflation to the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. nevertheless, with realized inflation well above that goal and the labor market still very tight, participants agreed that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate and would help keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. participants noted that, with regard to both real economic activity and inflation, it would take time for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized and that these lags complicated an assessment of the effects of monetary policy. in discussing potential policy actions at upcoming meetings, participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective, and they continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate in order to attain a sufficiently restrictive stance of policy to bring inflation down over time. many participants commented that there was significant uncertainty about the ultimate level of the federal funds rate needed to achieve the committee’s goals and that their assessment of that level would depend, in part, on incoming data. even so, various participants noted that, with inflation showing little sign thus far of abating, and with supply and demand imbalances in the economy persisting, their assessment of the ultimate level of the federal funds rate that would be necessary to achieve the committee’s goals was somewhat higher than they had previously expected. participants mentioned a number of considerations that would likely influence the pace of future increases in the target range for the federal funds rate. these considerations included the cumulative tightening of monetary policy to date, the lags between monetary policy actions and the behavior of economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. a number of participants observed that, as monetary policy approached a stance that was sufficiently restrictive to achieve the committee’s goals, it would become appropriate to slow the pace of increase in the target range for the federal funds rate. in addition, a substantial majority of participants judged that a slowing in the pace of increase would likely soon be appropriate. a slower pace in these circumstances would better allow the committee to assess progress toward its goals of maximum employment and price stability. the uncertain lags and magnitudes associated with the effects of monetary policy actions on economic activity and inflation were among the reasons cited regarding why such an assessment was important. a few participants commented  page 10 federal open market committee that slowing the pace of increase could reduce the risk of instability in the financial system. a few other participants noted that, before slowing the pace of policy rate increases, it could be advantageous to wait until the stance of policy was more clearly in restrictive territory and there were more concrete signs that inflation pressures were receding significantly. with monetary policy approaching a sufficiently restrictive stance, participants emphasized that the level to which the committee ultimately raised the target range for the federal funds rate, and the evolution of the policy stance thereafter, had become more important considerations for achieving the committee’s goals than the pace of further increases in the target range. participants agreed that communicating this distinction to the public was important in order to reinforce the committee’s strong commitment to returning inflation to the 2 percent objective. participants discussed a number of risk-management considerations related to the conduct of monetary policy. in light of the continuing broad-based and unacceptably high level of inflation and upside risks to the inflation outlook, participants remarked that purposefully moving to a more restrictive policy stance was consistent with risk-management considerations. some participants observed that there had been an increase in the risk that the cumulative policy restraint would exceed what was required to bring inflation back to 2 percent. several participants commented that continued rapid policy tightening increased the risk of instability or dislocations in the financial system. there was wide agreement that heightened uncertainty regarding the outlooks for both inflation and real activity underscored the importance of taking into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affected economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators had pointed to modest growth in spending and production. members also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. members agreed that inflation had remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. members observed that russia’s war against ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. they also agreed that the war and related events were creating additional upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. members concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. members agreed that the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 3¾ to 4 percent. members anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. members agreed to add language to this effect in the postmeeting statement, on the grounds that this would underscore the committee’s view that a sufficiently restrictive stance of monetary policy was needed for achieving its dual-mandate goals. members agreed that, in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, they would take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affected economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. members agreed to add language to this effect in the postmeeting statement in order to convey explicitly the range of factors that they would consider in determining future monetary policy actions. in addition, members agreed that they would continue reducing the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities, agency debt, and agency mbs, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in may. all members affirmed that they were strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerged that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.:  minutes of the meeting of november 1–2, 2022 page 11 “effective november 3, 2022, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 3¾ to 4 percent. • conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 4 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 3.8 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. russia’s war against ukraine is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. the war and related events are creating additional upward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. the committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 3¾ to 4 percent. the committee anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in may. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, james bullard, susan m. collins, lisa d. cook, esther l. george, philip n. jefferson, loretta j. mester, and christopher j. waller.  page 12 federal open market committee voting against this action: none. to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 3.9 percent, effective november 3, 2022. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve a ¾ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 4 percent, effective november 3, 2022. 4 it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, december 13– in taking this action, the board approved requests to establish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the federal reserve banks of boston, cleveland, richmond, atlanta, chicago, st. louis, minneapolis, dallas, and san francisco. this vote also encompassed approval by the board of governors of the establishment of a 4 percent primary credit rate by the remaining federal reserve banks, effective on the later of 4 14, 2022. the meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. on november 2, 2022. notation vote by notation vote completed on october 11, 2022, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on september 20–21, 2022.  james a. clouse secretary november 3, 2022, or the date such reserve banks inform the secretary of the board of such a request. (secretary’s note: subsequently, the federal reserve banks of new york, philadelphia, and kansas city were informed of the board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 4 percent, effective november 3, 2022.) 
ce december 14, 2022 chair powell. good afternoon. before i go into the details of today’s meeting, i would like to underscore for the american people that we understand the hardship that high inflation is causing and that we are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. over the course of the year, we have taken forceful actions to tighten the stance of monetary policy. we have covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our rapid tightening so far are yet to be felt. even so, we have more work to do. price stability is the responsibility of the federal reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. without price stability, the economy doesn’t work for anyone. in particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. today, the fomc raised our policy interest rate by ½ percentage point. we continue to anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. in addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive policy stance for some time. i will have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. the u.s. economy has slowed significantly from last year’s rapid pace. although real gdp rose at a pace of 2.9 percent last quarter, it is roughly unchanged through the first three quarters of this year. recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production this quarter. growth in consumer spending has slowed from last year’s rapid pace, in part reflecting lower real disposable income and tighter financial conditions. activity in the housing sector has weakened significantly, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. higher interest rates and  slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. as shown in our summary of economic projections, the median projection for real gdp growth stands at just 0.5 percent this year and next, well below the median estimate of the longer-run normal growth rate. despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remains extremely tight, with the unemployment rate near a 50-year low, job vacancies still very high, and wage growth elevated. job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 272,000 jobs per month over the last three months. although job vacancies have moved below their highs and the pace of job gains has slowed from earlier in the year, the labor market continues to be out of balance, with demand substantially exceeding the supply of available workers. the labor force participation rate is little changed since the beginning of the year. fomc participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing upward pressures on wages and prices. the median projection in the sep for the unemployment rate rises to 4.6 percent at the end of next year. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. over the 12 months ending in october, total pce prices rose 6 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 5 percent. in november, the 12-month change in the cpi was 7.1 percent, and the change in the core cpi was 6 percent. the inflation data received so far for october and november show a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of price increases. but it will take substantially more evidence to give confidence that inflation is on a sustained downward path. price pressures remain evident across a broad range of goods and services. russia’s war against ukraine has boosted prices for energy and food and has contributed to upward pressure on inflation. the median projection in the sep for total pce inflation is  5.6 percent this year and falls to 3.1 percent next year, 2.5 percent in 2024, and 2.1 percent in 2025; participants continue to see risks to inflation as weighted to the upside. despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters as well as measures from financial markets. but that is not grounds for complacency; the longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. at today’s meeting, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ½ percentage point, bringing the target range to 4¼ to 4½ percent. and we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. with today’s action, we have raised interest rates by 4¼ percentage points this year. we continue to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. over the course of the year, financial conditions have tightened significantly in response to our policy actions. financial conditions fluctuate in the short term in response to many factors, but it is important that, over time, they reflect the policy restraint that we are putting in place to return inflation to 2 percent. we are seeing the effects on demand in  the most interest-sensitive sectors of the economy, such as housing. it will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. in light of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, the committee decided to raise interest rates by 50 basis points today, a step-down from the 75 basis point pace seen over the previous four meetings. of course, 50 basis points is still a historically large increase, and we still have some ways to go. as shown in the sep, the median projection for the appropriate level of the federal funds rate is 5.1 percent at the end of next year, ½ percentage point higher than projected in september. the median projection is 4.1 percent at the end of 2024 and 3.1 percent at the end of 2025, still above the median estimate of its longer-run value. of course, these projections do not represent a committee decision or plan, and no one knows with any certainty where the economy will be a year or more from now. our decisions will depend on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. and we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting and communicate our thinking as clearly as possible. we are taking forceful steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. reducing inflation is likely to require a sustained period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. the historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. we will stay the course until the job is done. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the  fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you. i will look forward to your questions. michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. steve liesman, cnbc. thanks for taking my question, mr. chairman. you just talked about the importance of market conditions reflecting the policy restraint you put in place. since the november meeting, the 10-year has declined by 60 basis points, mortgage rates have come down, high-yield credit spreads have come in, the economy’s accelerated, and the stock market’s up 6 percent. is this loosening of financial conditions a problem for the fed in its effort, and its fight, against inflation? and, if so, do you need to do something about that? and how would you do something about that? thank you. chair powell. so, as i mentioned, it is important that overall financial conditions continue to reflect the policy restraint that we’re putting in place to bring inflation down to 2 percent. we think that financial conditions have tightened significantly in the past year. but our policy actions work through financial conditions. and those, in turn, affect economic activity, the labor market, and inflation. so what we control is our policy moves in the communications that we make. financial conditions both anticipate, and react to, our actions. i would add that our focus is not on short-term moves, but on persistent moves. and many, many things, of course, move financial conditions over time. i would say it’s our judgment today that we’re not at a sufficiently restrictive policy stance yet, which is why we say that we would expect that ongoing hikes would be appropriate. and i would point you to the sep again for our current assessment of what that peak level will be. as you will have seen, 19 people filled out the sep this time, and 17 of those 19 wrote down a peak rate of 5 percent or more—in the 5s. so that’s our best assessment today for what we think the peak rate will be.  you will also know that, at each subsequent sep during the course of this year, we’ve actually increased our estimate of what that peak rate will be. and today we’re—the sep that was published shows again that, overwhelmingly, fomc participants believe that inflation risks are to the upside. so i can’t tell you confidently that we won’t move up our estimate of the peak rate again at the next sep. i don’t know what we’ll do. it will depend on future data. what we’re writing down today is our best estimate of what we think that peak rate will be, based on what we know. obviously, if data—if the inflation data come in worse, that could move up. and it could move down if inflation data are softer. michelle smith. jeanna. jeanna smialek. jeanna smialek, new york times. thanks for taking our questions. the sep, like you mentioned, suggests that the fed will be making another ¾ percentage points worth of rate increases in 2023. i wonder if you would foresee that being in 25 basis point increments, 50 basis point increments—sort of how you see the speed playing out going forward. and then i wonder what you’re looking at as you determine when to stop. chair powell. so, as i’ve been saying, as we’ve gone through the course of this year, as we lifted off and got into the course of the year and we saw the—how strong inflation was and how persistent, it was very important to move quickly. in fact, the speed—the pace with which we’re moving was the most important thing. i think now that we’re coming to the end of this year, we’ve raised 425 basis points this year, and we’re into restrictive territory. it’s now not so important how fast we go. it’s far more important to think, what is the ultimate level? and then it’s—at a certain point, the question will become, how long do we remain restrictive? that will become the most important question. but i would say the most important question now is no longer the speed. so—and that applies to february as well. so i  think we’ll make the february decision based on the incoming data and where we see financial conditions, where we see the economy. and that’ll be the key thing, but—i mean, for that decision. but, ultimately, that question about how high to raise rates is going to be one that we make looking at our progress on inflation, looking at where financial conditions are, and making an assessment of whether policy is restrictive enough. [as] i’ve told you today, we have an assessment that we’re not at a restrictive enough stance, even with today’s move. and we’ve laid out our own—our individual assessments of what we would need to do to get there. at a certain point, though, we’ll get to that point. and then the question will be, how long do we stay there? and there, the strong view on the committee is that we’ll need to stay there, you know, until we’re really confident that inflation is coming down in a sustained way. and we think that that will be some time. now, why do i say that? if you look at—you can break inflation down into three, sort of, buckets. the first is goods inflation, and we see now, as we’ve been expecting, really, for a year and a half, that supply conditions would get better. and, ultimately, supply chains get fixed, and demand settles down a little bit and maybe goes back to services a little bit. and we start to see goods inflation coming down. we’re now starting to see that in this report and the last one. then you go to housing services. we know the story there is that housing services inflation has been very, very high and will continue to go up, actually. as rents expire and have to be renewed, they’re going to be renewed into a market where rates are higher than they were when the original leases were signed. but we see that the new leases that are—that the rate for new leases is coming down. so, once we work our way through that backlog, that inflation will  come down sometime next year. the third piece, which is something like 55 percent of the index, pce core inflation index, is non-housing-related core services. and that’s really a function of the labor market, largely. the biggest cost, by far, in that sector is labor. and we do see a very, very strong labor market, one where we haven’t seen much softening, where job growth is very high, where wages are very high. vacancies are quite elevated, and, really, there’s an imbalance in the labor market between supply and demand. so that part of it, which is the biggest part, is likely to take a substantial period to get down. the other—you know, the goods inflation has turned pretty quickly now after not turning at all for a year and a half. now it seems to be turning. but there’s an expectation, really, that the services inflation will not move down so quickly, so that we’ll have to stay at it, so that we may have to raise rates higher to get to where we want to go. and that’s really why we are writing down those high rates and why we’re expecting that they’ll have to remain high for a time. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. howard schneider with reuters. thanks for taking the question. you describe gdp growth in the seps as moderate or modest, i believe. yet it’s really approaching stall speed. half a percentage point is not much. you described labor market unemployment rate as representing some softening. but it’s nearly a full percentage point rise, and that’s well in excess of what has historically been associated with recession. why wouldn’t this be considered a recessionary projection by the fed? chair powell. well, i’ll tell you what the projection is. i don’t think it would qualify as a recession, though, because you’ve got positive growth. the expectations in the sep are basically as you said, which is, we’ve got growth at a modest level, which is to say that  ½ percentage point, that’s positive growth. it’s slow growth. it’s well below trend. it’s not going to feel like a boom. it’s going to feel like very slow growth, right? in that condition, labor market conditions are softening a bit. unemployment does go up a bit. i would say that many analysts believe that the natural rate of unemployment is actually elevated at this moment. so it’s not clear that those forecasts of inflation are really much above the natural rate of unemployment. we can never identify its location with great precision. but that 4.7 percent is still a strong labor market. if you look—you know, you’ve got—the reports we get from the field are that companies are very reluctant to lay people off, other than the tech companies, which is, you know, a story unto itself. generally, companies want to hold onto the workers they have because it’s been very, very hard to hire. so you’ve got all these vacancies out there—far in excess of the number of employed people. that doesn’t sound like a—you know, a labor market where a lot of people will need to be put out of work. so that we—you know, there are channels through which the labor market can come back into balance with relatively modest increases in unemployment, we believe. none of that is guaranteed, but that is what their forecast reflects. michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. thanks. nick timiraos, wall street journal. chair powell, i want to follow up on jeanna’s question. the decision to step down the pace of rate increase—rate rises appears to have been socialized at your last meeting, largely before the past two cpi reports showed inflation decelerating in line with the committee’s forecasts this year. you just now talked about making decisions meeting by meeting and being mindful of the lags of policy. does that mean, all things equal, you would feel more comfortable probing where the terminal rate is by moving in 25 basis point increments, including beginning at your next meeting?  chair powell. so i haven’t made a judgment on what size rate hike to make at the last meeting. but, you know, what you said is broadly right, which is, having moved so quickly and having now so much restraint that’s still in the pipeline, we think that the appropriate thing to do now is to move to a slower pace. and, you know, that will allow us to feel our way and— you know, and get to that level, we think, and better balance the risks that we face. so that’s the idea. it makes a lot of sense, it seems to me—particularly if you consider how far we’ve come. but, again, i can’t tell you today what the actual size of that will be. it will depend on a variety of factors, including the incoming data in particular, the state of the economy, the state of financial conditions. nick timiraos. with the cpi report, if it did come out last week, do you think it would have changed some of those forecasts in today’s estimate? chair powell. no. absolutely not. no. as a—just a matter of practice, the sep reflects any data that’s—that comes out during the meeting. and participants know that they have the—they know this—that they can make changes to their sep during the meeting, you know, well in advance of the press conference so that we’re not running around. but that’s not the case. it’s never the case that the seps don’t reflect an important piece of data that came in on the first day of the meeting. michelle smith. rachel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. rachel siegel from the washington post. thank you for taking our questions. i’m wondering if we could talk about the projection for the unemployment rate. why has the fed raised its unemployment projection? is it because the model suggests that a higher terminal rate would automatically cause a higher unemployment  rate? or are you seeing signs that the labor market isn’t quite as strong as we think it is now? thanks. chair powell. no. it’s not about the strength of the labor market. the labor market is clearly very strong. it is more just that, you know, by now, we had expected—we’ve continually expected to make faster progress on inflation than we have, ultimately. and that’s why the peak rate for this year goes up between this meeting and the september meeting. you see that—you see the fact that we’ve made less progress than expected on inflation. so that’s why that goes up. and that’s why unemployment goes up, because we’re having to tighten policy more. and so it didn’t go up by much in the meeting, i don’t think. but that’s the idea, is slower progress on inflation, tighter policy, probably higher rates probably held for longer just to get to where you—the kind of restriction that you need to get inflation down to 2 percent. rachel siegel. do you have a sense of, in order to get to that number, how much of that could be caused by layoffs versus vacancies, trimming, or changes to the labor force population rate? chair powell. it’s very hard to say. you know, there—you can look at history, right? and history would, you know, would say that, in a situation like this, the declines in unemployment would be more meaningful, i think, than what you see written down there. but why do we think that is the case? so, i’ll give you a few reasons. first just is that there’s this huge overhang of vacancies, meaning that vacancies can come down a fair amount. and we’re hearing from many companies that they don’t want to lay people off—so that they’ll keep people because it’s been so hard. i mean, i think we’ve—it feels like we have a structural labor shortage out there where there are, you know, 4 million fewer people, a little more than 4 million who were in the  workforce available to work than there’s demand for workforce. so the fact that there’s a strong labor market, you know, means that companies will hold on to workers. and it means that it may take longer, but it also means that the costs in unemployment may be less. again, that we’re going to find out empirically. but i think that’s a reasonably possible outcome. and you do hear, you know, many, many labor economists believe that it is. so we’ll see, though. michelle smith. colby. colby smith. thank you. colby smith with the financial times. how should we interpret the higher core inflation forecast for 2023 in the sep? does that not then suggest that the policy rate currently forecasted for next year should actually be higher than the 5.1 median estimate penciled in? chair powell. well, i think that’s why one of the reasons it went up was that core came in stronger this year. yeah. what you see is our best estimate, as of today—really, as of today—for how high we need to raise rates to—how much we need to tighten policy to create enough, you know, restrictive policy to slow economic activity and slow—soften the labor market and bring inflation down through those channels. that’s all—that is the estimate—best estimate—we make today. and, as i mentioned, we’ll make another estimate for the next sep. and we’ll, you know, of course, between meetings, we do the same thing, but we don’t publish it. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi. victoria guida with politico. i wanted to make sure i understand specifically what’s going on in the sep, because you all expect rates to go higher, but you’re also more pessimistic about what inflation is going to look like next year. and i was just  wondering, you know, given that we have seen some cooling in inflation, you know, is it—is that primarily because of wage growth, that you expect wage growth to be sort of a headwind? chair powell. we’re going into next year with higher inflation than we had thought, right? so we’re actually moving down to—the level that we’re moving down to next year is still a very large drop in inflation from where inflation is running now, well more than 1 percent change in inflation. but remember that the jump[ing]-off point at the beginning of the year is higher. so, you know, we—we’re moving down still by a very large chunk. i don’t think it’s having—i don’t think the policy is having any less effect. it’s just starting from a higher level at the end of 2022. so we’re getting down. i believe the median is 3½ percent. that would be—that’s a pretty significant drop in inflation. and, you know, where’s it coming from? it’s coming from the goods sector, clearly. by the middle of next year, we should begin to see lower inflation from the housing services sector. and then, you know, the big question is, when we—how much will you see from the largest, the 55 percent of the index, which is the non-housing services sector? and, you know, that’s where you need to see—we believe you need to see a better balancing of supply and demand in the labor market so that you have—it’s not that we don’t want wage increases. we want strong wage increases. we just want them to be at a level that’s consistent with 2 percent inflation. right now that—if you put into—if you factor in productivity estimates, standard productivity estimates, wages are running, you know, well above what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation. michelle smith. neil. neil irwin. thanks. hi, chair powell. neil irwin with axios. some of your colleagues have been pretty explicit that they can’t imagine rate cuts happening in 2023. that’s  certainly not implied by the sep. but futures markets have priced in some easing in the back half of next year. what’s your view of the likelihood of any kind of rate cuts next year? what circumstances might make that plausible? chair powell. you know, our focus right now is really on moving our policy stance to one that is restrictive enough to ensure a return of inflation to our 2 percent goal over time. it’s not on rate cuts. and we think that we’ll have to maintain a restrictive stance of policy for some time. historical experience cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. i guess i would say it this way: i wouldn’t see us considering rate cuts until the committee is confident that inflation is moving down to 2 percent in a sustained way. so that’s the test i would articulate. and you’re correct. there are not rate cuts in the sep for 2023. michelle smith. steve. steve matthews. steve matthews with bloomberg. let me ask you about china. in the last few weeks, china has abandoned its covid policy and been reopening pretty strongly. i’m wondering if you see that as disinflationary because you’re seeing supply chains improve or inflationary because it obviously brings a lot more demand globally, improves the global outlook for growth and for commodities prices. chair powell. so you’re right. those two things will offset each other. weaker output in china will push down on commodity prices, but it could interfere with supply chains ultimately. and that could push inflation up in the west. it’s very hard to say, you know, how much—how those two will offset each other. and it doesn’t seem likely, actually, that the overall net effect would be material on us. but, to your point, china faces a very challenging situation in reopening. you know, we’ve seen, waves of covid all around the world can interfere with economic activity. china, a very critical manufacturing—place for manufacturing  and exporting. their supply chain is very important. and china faces a reopening. they’ve— you know, they’ve backed away from their covid restriction policies. there could be very significant increases in covid. and we’ll just have to see. it’s a risky situation. it—but, again, it doesn’t seem like it’s likely to have material overall effects on us. michelle smith. chris. chris rugaber. hi. chris rugaber, associated press. thank you for taking my question. i wondered if you could comment a bit more about yesterday’s inflation report. i mean, it showed inflation cooling in all three of the categories that you laid out at brookings. are you starting to see—are you confident that you’re seeing real progress on getting inflation under control? are you still worried it could slip into some kind of unentrenched, you know, upward spiral? thank you. chair powell. right. so the data that we’ve received so far for october and november, we don’t have the—some of the—we have some remaining data to get in november, but they clearly do show a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of price increases. as i mentioned in my opening statement, it will take substantially more evidence to give confidence that inflation is on a sustained downward path. so the way we think about this is this: this report is very much in line with what we’ve been expecting and hoping for. and what it does is, it provides greater confidence in our forecast of declining inflation. as i mentioned, we’ve been expecting significant—forecasting significant declines in overall inflation and core inflation in the coming year. and this is the kind of reading that it will take to support that. so, really, this gives us greater confidence in our forecasts rather than, at this point, changing our forecast. in terms of the pieces, we have been expecting goods inflation to come down as supply chain pressures eased. that’s happening now. housing services—as i  mentioned, there’s good news in the pipeline. as long as housing—new housing leases show declining inflation, that will show up in the measure around the middle of next year. so that should help. and the big piece, again, is core services, ex housing, which is very important. and we have a ways to go there. you do see some beginning signs there. but, ultimately, that’s the big—the more than half, as i mentioned, of pce core index. and it’s very fundamentally about the labor market and wages. if you look at wages, look at the average hourly earnings number we got with the last payrolls report, you don’t really see much progress in terms of average hourly earnings coming down. now, there may be composition effects and other effects in that. so we don’t put too much weight on any one report. these things can be volatile month to month. but we will be looking for wages moving, you know, down to more normal levels where workers are doing well and, ultimately, their gains are not being eaten up by inflation. michelle smith. michael mckee. michael mckee. there’s a—excuse me, michael mckee from bloomberg radio and television. there’s a little bit of a disconnect between the optimistic view you just expressed about the economy and the changes that you’ve made in the sep. and i’m wondering if you’re reacting to the fact that the markets have loosened financial conditions or if you feel the fed may be a little bit behind on inflation, whether the recent disinflation we’re seeing is transitory or not, and how this affects the idea of a soft landing if you’re projecting just ½ percent growth for this year. chair powell. so if i—i think i got your question. so, you know, one thing is to say is, i think our policy’s in—getting into a pretty good place now. we’re restrictive, and i think we’re—you know, we’re getting close to that level of sufficient—we think—sufficiently  restrictive. we laid out today what our best estimates are to get there. and, i mean, it boils down to, how long do we think this process is going to take? and, of course, we’re—we welcome these better inflation reports for the last two months. they’re very welcome. but i think we’re realistic about the broader project. so that’s all. that’s the point i would make. it’s—you know, we see goods prices coming down. we understand what will happen with housing services. but the big story will really be the rest of it, and there’s not much progress there. and that’s going to take some time. i think my view and my colleagues’ view is that this will take some time. we’ll have to hold policy at a restrictive level for a sustained period so that, you know, two good—you know, two good monthly reports are, you know, very welcome. of course, they’re very welcome. but we need to be honest with ourselves that there’s, you know, inflation—12-month core inflation is 6 percent cpi. that’s three times our 2 percent target. now, it’s good to see progress. but let’s just understand we have a long ways to go to get back to price stability. michael mckee. well, do you think the soft landing is no longer achievable? chair powell. no, i wouldn’t say that. no. i don’t say that. i mean, i would say this: you know, to the extent we need to keep rates higher and keep them there for longer and inflation, you know, moves up higher and higher, i think that narrows the runway. but lower inflation readings, if they persist, in time, could certainly make it more possible. so i just—i don’t think anyone knows whether we’re going to have a recession or not and, if we do, whether it’s going to be a deep one or not. it’s just, it’s not knowable. and certainly, you know, lower inflation reports, were they to continue for a period of time, would increase the likelihood of a— put it this way, of a return to price stability that involves significantly less of an increase in unemployment than would be expected given the historical record.  michelle smith. brian. brian cheung. hi, chairman powell. brian cheung, nbc news. you warned americans of pain earlier this year as the fed hikes rates. but with the fed now expected to raise rates higher than you thought when you first said that, just wondering where we are in that pain. how would you describe that to americans if the projections on unemployment find themselves—that’d be 1.6 million americans out of jobs? chair powell. so the largest amount of pain—the worst pain would come from a failure to raise rates high enough and from us allowing inflation to become entrenched in the economy so that the ultimate cost of getting it out of the economy would be very high in terms of employment, meaning very high unemployment for extended periods of time, the kind of thing that had to happen when inflation really got out of control and the fed didn’t respond aggressively enough or soon enough in a prior episode, you know, 50 years ago. so that’s really—the worst pain would be if we failed to act. what we’re doing now is, you know, it’s raising interest rates for people. and so people are paying higher rates on mortgages and that kind of thing. there will be some softening in labor market conditions. and i wish there were a completely painless way to restore price stability. there isn’t. and this is the best we can do. i do think, though, that—and markets are pretty confident, it seems to me—that we will get inflation under control. and i believe we will. we’re certainly highly committed to do that. michelle smith. grady. grady trimble. thank you, mr. chair. grady trimble with fox business. you’ve reiterated today and the committee has reiterated its commitment to that 2 percent inflation  target. i wonder, is there ever a point where you actually reevaluate that target and maybe increase your inflation target if it is stickier than even you think it is? chair powell. that’s just—so, changing our inflation goal is just something we’re not thinking about, and it’s something we’re not going to think about. it’s—we have a 2 percent inflation goal, and we’ll use our tools to get inflation back to 2 percent. i think this isn’t the time to be thinking about that. i mean, there may be a longer-run project at some point. but that is not where we are at all. the committee—we’re not considering that. we’re not going to consider that under any circumstances. we’re going to keep our inflation target at 2 percent. we’re going to use our tools to get inflation back to 2 percent. michelle smith. nicole. nicole goodkind. thank you, chairman powell. nicole goodkind, cnn business. as you monitor wage growth and unemployment data, i wonder if you’re paying close attention to a sector or even income level? like, how do you factor potential exacerbations of inequality into your risk calculations, especially given the k-shaped recovery of 2020? chair powell. so the—i would go back to the labor market that we had in 2018, ’19, ’20. so, what that looked like was, wage increases for the people at the lowest end of the income spectrum were the largest. the gaps between racial groups and gender groups were at their smallest in recorded history. that’s—and all of that because of a tight labor market, a tight labor market which had inflation running, you know, just a tick below 2 percent and the economy growing right at its potential. so that seems like something that would be really good for the economy and for the country, if we could get back to that. and so that’s what all of us want to do. we want to get back to a long expansion where the labor market can remain strong over an extended period of  time. that’s a really good thing for workers in the economy. and we’d love to get back to that. that’s what our goal is. you know, there’s—in the near term, we have to use our tools to restore price stability. but we, you know, we can’t—what we have to think about is the medium and longer term. if you think about it, the country went through a difficult time—i think much more difficult than we can think it would happen here. but it really set up our economy for several decades of prosperity. so price stability is something that really pays dividends for the benefit of the economy and the people in it over a very, very long period of time. and so when it is lost, for whatever reason, it has to be restored and as quickly as possible—which is what we’re doing. nicole goodkind. in the short term, are you factoring in these exacerbations or potential exacerbations in the economy? are you monitoring them? chair powell. we do, yes. we absolutely do. we look at—it’s our regular practice to talk about unemployment rates by different groups, including racial groups and that sort of thing. we do. we keep our eye on that. michelle smith. nancy. nancy marshall-genzer. hi. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. what would you do if the economy slows so much that we enter a recession before we see strong consistent signs that inflation is slowing—in other words, stagflation? chair powell. so i don’t want to get into too many hypotheticals. but, you know, we’ll—it’s hard to deal with hypotheticals. so let me just say that we have to use our tools to support maximum employment and price stability. i’ve made it clear that right now, the labor market’s very, very strong. you’re near a 50-year low where you’re at or above maximum employment, a 50-year low in unemployment, vacancies are very high, wages—nominal wages  are very high. so the labor market’s very, very strong. where we’re missing is on the inflation side. and we’re missing by a lot on the inflation side. so that means we need to really focus on getting inflation under control, and that’s what we’ll do. i think, as the economy heals, the two goals come more into play. but right now, clearly, the focus has to be on getting inflation down. michelle smith. greg. greg robb. thank you, chairman powell. greg robb from marketwatch. you spoke a little bit ago. you said that the u.s. looks—it looks like we have a structural labor shortage in the economy. could you expand on that, talk a little bit more about that? and, really, are you talking about getting congress action on increasing, like, legal immigration, things like that? thank you. chair powell. so, what i meant by that, with “structural labor shortage,” is, if you look at where we are now, as i mentioned, there—if you just look at demand for labor, you can look at vacancies plus people who are actually working. and then you can take supply of labor by, “are you in the labor market?” “are you looking for a job or have a job?” and you’re 4— more than 4 million people short. we don’t see—despite very high wages and an incredibly tight labor market, we don’t see participation moving up—which is contrary to what we thought. so the upshot of all that is, the labor market is actually—it should—it’s 3½ million people, at least, smaller than it should have been based on pre-pandemic. just assume population and reasonable growth and aging of the population; our labor force should be 3½ million more than it is. and that—there’re lots of easy ways to get to bigger numbers than that if you go back a few more years. so why is that? part of it is just accelerated retirements. people dropped out and aren’t coming back at a higher rate than expected. part of it is that we lost a half a million  people who would have been work—close to half a million who would have been working died from covid. and part of it is that migration has been lower. we don’t prescribe—you know, it’s not our job to prescribe things. but, you know, i think if you ask businesses, you know, pretty much everybody you talk to says there aren’t enough people. we need more people. so i tried to identify that in my—in a speech i gave a month ago, but i stopped short of telling congress what to do because, you know, they gave us a job. and we need to, you know, do that job. michelle smith. thanks. jennifer. jennifer schonberger. thank you, chair powell. jennifer schonberger with yahoo finance. you say you expect growth of just ½ percent next year. given that you’ve said the process of raising rates and getting inflation back under control will be painful, have you had discussions within the committee and addressed how long and/or how deep of a recession you would be willing to accept? chair powell. no. i mean, what we do is, we make our forecasts, and we publish them quarterly. and, you know, if you look at those forecasts, those are forecasts for slow growth, for a softening labor market, by which i mean, unemployment goes up but not a great deal. and you see inflation coming down. you see rates going up a lot. you see inflation coming down. those are those forecasts, and that’s really what they show. we’re not—of course, we don’t talk about, you know, this kind of a recession and that kind of a recession. we just, you know, we make those forecasts. the staff runs—and you will see this if you look at the old tealbooks—runs alternative simulations of all different kinds at every meeting, and we look at those, too. and those will explore different things. but that’s just, you know, upside and downside scenarios. of course, that’s a responsible practice that  we’ve carried on for many decades. but, no, we don’t—we haven’t asked ourselves that question. michelle smith. we’ll go to jean for the last question. jean yung. hi. jean yung with market news. i wanted to ask about the sep again. if you’re reaching peak rates around 5 percent in the first half of next year and inflation starts to decline materially, that would seem to make the real rate gradually more restrictive. is that something that’s built into the projections and into models? is that something you would want to see? chair powell. so we do know that. of course, that’s something that we know we’d see. but, as i mentioned, you know, we wouldn’t—i wouldn’t see the committee cutting rates until we’re confident that inflation is moving down in a sustained way. that would be my test. i don’t see us as having a really clear and precise understanding of what the neutral rate is and what real rates are so that it would mechanically happen like that. it would—really, it’ll be a test of—for cutting rates, i think, in the event, it’ll be a question of, do we actually feel confident that inflation is coming down in a sustained way? thank you very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. page 2 federal open market committee  jon faust, senior special adviser to the chair, division of board members, board ann e. misback, secretary, office of the secretary, board glenn follette, associate director, division of research and statistics, board raven molloy, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board joshua gallin, senior special adviser to the chair, division of board members, board norman j. morin, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board jonathan e. goldberg, principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board michelle m. neal, head of markets, federal reserve bank of new york erik a. heitfield, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board giovanni nicolò, senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board anna nordstrom, capital markets trading head, federal reserve bank of new york jane e. ihrig, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board marcelo ochoa, 3 principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board benjamin k. johannsen, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board giovanni olivei, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of boston michael t. kiley, deputy director, division of financial stability, board anna paulson, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of chicago don h. kim, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board andrea raffo, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of minneapolis elizabeth k. kiser, associate director, division of research and statistics, board linda robertson, assistant to the board, division of board members, board sylvain leduc, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of san francisco achilles sangster ii, senior information manager, division of monetary affairs, board andreas lehnert, director, division of financial stability, board anthony sarver, senior financial institution and policy analyst, division of monetary affairs, board paul lengermann, assistant director, division of research and statistics, board john w. schindler, 4 senior associate director, division of financial stability, board eric lesueur,2 policy and market monitoring advisor, federal reserve bank of new york samuel schulhofer-wohl, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of dallas kurt f. lewis, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board seth searls,2 policy and market monitoring associate director, federal reserve bank of new york laura lipscomb, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board nitish ranjan sinha, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board david lópez-salido, senior associate director, division of monetary affairs, board clara vega, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board jonathan p. mccarthy, economic research advisor, federal reserve bank of new york annette vissing-jørgensen, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board 3 attended tuesday’s session only. 4 attended opening remarks for tuesday’s session only. minutes of the meeting of december 13–14, 2022 page 3  jeffrey d. walker,2 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board min wei, senior associate director, division of monetary affairs, board paul r. wood, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board rebecca zarutskie, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board selection of committee officer by unanimous vote, the committee selected richard ostrander to serve as deputy general counsel, effective december 13, 2022, until the first regularly scheduled meeting of the committee in 2023. developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager pro tem turned first to a discussion of developments in financial markets. following several months of tightening, financial conditions eased over the period as investor concerns about global risks edged lower and incoming data showed nascent signs of a moderation in inflationary pressures. central bank communications signaling a slower pace of policy rate increases appeared to contribute to improved sentiment. measures of implied volatility across financial markets declined somewhat from the elevated levels observed in october. consistent with the decline in volatility, model-based measures suggested that a drop in term premiums accounted for much of the decline in treasury yields over the period. equity markets moved higher. however, equity market contacts noted risks to growth ahead, and earnings expectations for coming quarters had been marked down. in foreign exchange markets, moderating concerns about the potential for highly elevated u.s. interest rates spurred a depreciation in the foreign exchange value of the dollar. in other market developments, the manager pro tem noted the failure of a prominent crypto-asset exchange. while the spillovers from this situation had been significant among other crypto lenders and exchanges, the collapse was not seen as posing broader market risks to the financial system. regarding the outlook for inflation in the united states, inflation compensation implied by treasury inflation protected securities declined over the period, responding to lower-than-expected consumer price index (cpi) data and a sizable drop in oil prices. however, the desk survey-based measures of inflation expectations were little changed from the prior survey, suggesting that falling inflation risk premiums may have contributed to the moves. both market- and survey-based measures continued to point to expectations for a moderation of inflation over the coming year. regarding the outlook for monetary policy, both market- and desk survey-based measures indicated expectations for the committee to maintain elevated policy rates through 2023. in the december survey, the median respondent’s modal expectation for the path of the federal funds rate in 2023 shifted higher by 25 basis points relative to the november survey. the survey-based estimate of the expected policy path in 2024 continued to suggest a decline in the target range for the federal funds rate over 2024, little changed from the path anticipated in the november survey. in contrast, the market-implied path of the federal funds rate in 2024 shifted down by as much as ¾ percentage point over the period, likely reflecting declining risk premiums. the manager pro tem turned next to a discussion of operations and money markets and assessed that balance sheet runoff was proceeding smoothly. repurchase agreement (repo) rates firmed modestly relative to the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility rate over the period with balance sheet reduction reportedly contributing, in part, to an increase in the demand for financing of treasury securities. on rrp balances declined, on net, as money market funds shifted investments out of the on rrp facility, reportedly in favor of higher rates available in repo markets. in recent months, banks continued to increase their use of wholesale funding. in addition, survey information suggested that banks expected to move deposit rates modestly higher relative to the target range in coming months. over time, greater competition among banks for funding could contribute to drawdowns in the on rrp facility. staff indicated that they would continue to monitor money market conditions closely as balance sheet reduction proceeds. looking ahead to year end, market participants anticipated limited pressures. the manager pro tem noted that if transitory pressures emerged in money markets, the federal reserve’s backstop facilities are available to support effective policy implementation and smooth market functioning. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. page 4 federal open market committee  staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the december 13–14 meeting suggested that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) was increasing at a modest pace in the fourth quarter of 2022 after expanding strongly in the third quarter. labor market conditions eased somewhat over october and november but remained quite tight. consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—stepped down in october but continued to be elevated. flation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas remained at 4.7 percent in october. in november, the 12-month change in the cpi stepped down to 7.1 percent and core cpi inflation dropped to 6.0 percent. the cpi, along with data from the producer price index, pointed to a further slowing in pce price inflation in november. a preliminary estimate of the staff’s common inflation expectations index, which combines information from many indicators of inflation expectations and inflation compensation, edged down in the fourth quarter but continued to be above pre-pandemic levels. total nonfarm payroll employment posted solid gains in october and november that were slower than the average monthly pace seen over the earlier part of the year. the unemployment rate moved up 0.2 percentage point to 3.7 percent in october and remained at that rate in november. on balance, the unemployment rate for african americans edged down over those two months, while the unemployment rate for hispanics increased slightly; the unemployment rates for both groups remained above the national measure. both the labor force participation rate and the employment-topopulation ratio declined a little over the past two months. the private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, moved back down in october but remained high. after expanding at a moderate pace in the third quarter, real pce growth appeared to have picked up in the fourth quarter. in contrast, residential investment looked to be contracting sharply further, and growth in business fixed investment seemed to be slowing markedly, with tepid gains in equipment and intangibles spending and continued declines in nonresidential structures investment. manufacturing production increased only modestly in october, and the available data pointed to a decline in november. a decrease in factory output would be consistent with recent readings from national and regional manufacturing surveys, which showed declining new orders and a drawdown in order backlogs. nominal wage growth continued to be elevated and remained above the pace judged to be consistent with the fomc’s 2 percent inflation objective. average hourly earnings rose 5.1 percent over the 12 months ending in november, close to the pace recorded in the employment cost index of hourly compensation in the private sector over the 12 months ending in september. compensation per hour (cph) in the business sector rose 4.0 percent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter, but the reported increase likely understated the true pace of increase in cph, as the lower second-quarter employment data from the quarterly census of employment and wages had not yet been incorporated in the cph measure. consumer price inflation remained elevated but had eased in recent months. total pce price inflation was 6.0 percent over the 12 months ending in october, 0.3 percentage point below the september figure. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 5.0 percent over the 12 months ending in october, down 0.2 percentage point from its september reading. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price in- after narrowing in the third quarter, the nominal u.s. international trade deficit widened in october. real goods exports fell, led by declines in exports of industrial supplies and consumer goods. real goods imports rose, driven by increases in imports of industrial supplies, which more than offset declines in imports of capital goods and consumer goods. exports of services rose, in part as travel exports continued to recover, while imports of services were little changed. foreign economic activity grew at a moderate pace in the third quarter, but more recent data pointed to weakening growth, weighed down by the economic fallout of russia’s war against ukraine and a covid-19-related slowdown in china. high inflation continued to contribute to a decline in real disposable incomes, which, together with disruptions to energy supplies, depressed economic activity, especially in europe. in china, authorities began to ease social restrictions even as covid cases surged, raising the prospect of significant disruptions to economic activity in the near term, but also a faster reopening. weaker global demand and high interest rates also weighed on activity in emerging market economies. despite tentative signs of easing in foreign headline inflation, core inflationary pressures remained elevated in minutes of the meeting of december 13–14, 2022 page 5  many countries. in response to high inflation, many central banks further tightened monetary policy, albeit at a slower pace in some cases. period, mostly passing through the increase in administered rates, while bank deposit rates increased only slightly in october and november. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, treasury yields and measures of inflation compensation declined, on net, and the implied path of the federal funds rate in 2023 ended modestly lower. stock market indexes rose, on balance, likely reflecting reduced concerns about the inflation outlook, and market volatility declined notably. borrowing costs declined, on net, over the intermeeting period. credit flows moderated a bit in recent months, and the credit quality of businesses and most households remained solid. foreign financial conditions broadly eased over the intermeeting period, largely driven by lower-than-expected u.s. inflation data. the foreign exchange value of the dollar depreciated against most foreign currencies, particularly against those of advanced foreign economies, in part reflecting a narrowing of near-term yield differentials between the united states and other advanced economies. investors reacted positively to news of an easing of covid restrictions in china, which drove risky asset prices significantly higher despite near-term challenges associated with the health policy shift. emerging market fund outflows moderated and turned to inflows later in the intermeeting period. optionimplied volatility measures for exchange rates and benchmark foreign yields declined but remained elevated by historical norms amid a high degree of uncertainty around global inflation and the prospects for a reopening of the chinese economy. the expected path of the federal funds rate implied by a straight read of financial market quotes ended the intermeeting period lower, largely reflecting data releases that pointed to a larger-than-expected moderation in inflation. medium-to-longer-term nominal treasury yields declined substantially over the intermeeting period, driven primarily by lower-than-expected inflation data releases, which appeared to prompt a substantial reduction in investors’ concerns about the possibility that inflation would remain high for a long period. in line with those developments, inflation compensation measures based on inflation swaps declined notably, especially for shorter maturities. broad stock price indexes increased, likely reflecting reduced concerns about the inflation outlook and the associated implications for the future path of policy. on net, the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—the vix—decreased notably and was around the middle of its range since mid-2020. in line with reduced investor concerns about the inflation outlook, spreads of interest rates on corporate debt, mortgagebacked securities, and municipal bonds to comparableduration treasury yields all narrowed over the intermeeting period. conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period, with the november increase in the target range for the federal funds rate and the associated increases in the federal reserve’s administered rates passing through quickly to overnight money market rates. in secured markets, repo rates were below the on rrp offering rate less frequently than in the previous intermeeting period. daily take-up in the on rrp facility declined modestly, consistent with the recent firming in overnight repo rates. net yields on money market funds rose further over the intermeeting in domestic credit markets, changes in borrowing costs were mixed during the intermeeting period but remained above levels observed at the end of the previous tightening cycle. yields for corporate bonds declined, while borrowing costs for leveraged loans remained at an elevated level. bank interest rates for commercial and industrial (c&i) loans continued to trend up in the third quarter. municipal bond yields also decreased across rating categories. residential mortgage rates fell, on net, after the november fomc meeting. in contrast, interest rates in credit card offers continued to increase, reflecting the higher prime rate that was quickly passed through. interest rates on auto loans also rose steadily through november. credit continued to be generally available to businesses and households, but high borrowing costs appeared to weigh on financing volumes in many markets. issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds rebounded somewhat in late october and november from earlier subdued levels, while speculative-grade issuance remained soft. new launches of leveraged loans picked up in november, particularly for higher-rated firms. business loan originations continued to expand in october and november but at a slower pace than observed in previous months. c&i loans continued to grow in october and november but decelerated relative to the third-quarter pace, moderating the robust rate of growth observed earlier this year. nonetheless, the volume of page 6 federal open market committee  c&i lending remained solid overall. commercial real estate (cre) loans outstanding at commercial banks continued to increase in october and november, but the recent pace was somewhat lower than in previous months. in addition, banks increased cre originations to multifamily and industrial properties relative to office properties, reflecting caution in the context of rising office vacancies. moreover, commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) issuance softened somewhat in october amid elevated financing costs and tighter underwriting standards. credit availability to small businesses appeared to have tightened further this fall, with the share of small firms reporting that it was more difficult to obtain credit than three months earlier trending up through november. credit was readily available in the residential mortgage market for high-credit-score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. credit availability for households with lower credit scores was considerably tighter at levels comparable with what prevailed before the pandemic. the number of home purchases and refinance mortgage rate locks edged lower at subdued levels despite recent declines in mortgage interest rates. in contrast, home equity lines of credit (helocs) grew notably in recent months, on net, potentially reflecting homeowners using helocs as a preferred way of extracting home equity in the presence of high mortgage rates. consumer credit remained available for most consumers through september, with auto loans and credit card debt growing at a robust pace. bank credit data also indicate that the expansion in credit card balances continued in october before slowing in early november. the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained solid. the volume of speculative-grade corporate bond downgrades slightly exceeded upgrades in october and november, while for investment-grade corporate bonds, the volume of upgrades turned positive, on net, in november. leveraged loans experienced net downgrades in october, but the pace of net downgrades slowed substantially in recent weeks. default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans remained at very low levels. however, measures of expected default probabilities for corporate bonds and leveraged loans had increased from their levels at the beginning of the year in recent months. overall, the credit quality of municipalities remained robust amid strong revenues at state and local governments. the credit quality of businesses that borrow from banks remained sound on balance. delinquencies on c&i loans stayed flat, and those on small businesses loans continued to edge up, but delinquencies remained low relative to historical levels. in addition, the credit quality of non-agency cmbs loan borrowers deteriorated slightly, with average delinquency rates ticking up in september and october, driven by the office and retail sectors. the credit quality of most households remained solid overall. delinquencies on conventional mortgages continued to trend down through october, while those on federal housing administration mortgages ticked up a bit from low levels. in contrast, delinquency rates for credit cards and auto loans continued to rise over the third quarter. while delinquency rates on credit cards remained low relative to their historical range, those on auto loans surpassed their pre-pandemic peak. staff economic outlook the forecast for u.s. economic activity prepared by the staff for the december fomc meeting was not as weak as the november projection. recent data suggested that real gdp growth in the second half of 2022 was stronger than previously expected, but economic growth was still forecast to slow markedly in 2023 from its second-half pace. broad financial conditions were projected to be somewhat less restrictive than previously assumed, as the effects of a higher path for equity values and a lower path for the dollar more than offset a higher medium-term trajectory for interest rates. nevertheless, the forecast for u.s. real gdp growth through 2025 remained subdued. the staff slightly lowered its outlook for potential output, reflecting a lower expected trend in labor force participation. moreover, the staff assumed a slower pace of decline in the natural rate of unemployment over the near term in response to recent estimates suggesting that job-matching efficiency was not improving as fast as previously anticipated. with all these changes, output was expected to move below the staff’s estimate of potential near the end of 2024—a year later than in the previous forecast—and to remain below potential in 2025. likewise, the unemployment rate was expected to move above the staff’s estimate of its natural rate near the end of 2024 and remain above it in 2025. on a four-quarter change basis, total pce price inflation was expected to be 5.5 percent in 2022, while core inflation was expected to be 4.7 percent, both lower than in the november projection. with the effects of supply– demand imbalances in goods markets expected to unwind further and labor and product markets projected to become less tight, the staff continued to forecast that inflation would decline markedly over the next two years. core goods inflation was anticipated to slow further, housing services inflation was expected to peak in 2023 and then move down, while core non-housing services minutes of the meeting of december 13–14, 2022 page 7  inflation was forecast to move down as wage growth eased. in 2025, both total and core pce price inflation were expected to be near 2 percent. with inflation still elevated, the staff continued to view the risks to the inflation projection as skewed to the upside. moreover, the sluggish growth in real private domestic spending expected over the next year, a subdued global economic outlook, and persistently tight financial conditions were seen as tilting the risks to the downside around the baseline projection for real economic activity, and the staff still viewed the possibility of a recession sometime over the next year as a plausible alternative to the baseline. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2022 through 2025 and over the longer run, based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that recent indicators pointed to modest growth of spending and production. nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. participants recognized that russia’s war against ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. the war and related events were contributing to upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. against this background, participants continued to be highly attentive to inflation risks. participants observed that the growth of economic activity had slowed significantly in 2022 from the previous year’s robust pace, partly in response to the committee’s policy actions. the effects of those actions were especially notable in interest-sensitive sectors, particularly housing. participants remarked that, although real gdp appeared to have rebounded moderately in the second half of 2022 after declining somewhat in the first half, economic activity appeared likely to expand in 2023 at a pace well below its trend growth rate. with inflation remaining unacceptably high, participants expected that a sustained period of below-trend real gdp growth would be needed to bring aggregate supply and aggregate demand into better balance and thereby reduce inflationary pressures. in their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that growth in consumer spending in september and october had been stronger than they had previously expected, likely supported by a strong labor market and households running down excess savings accumulated during the pandemic. a couple of participants remarked that excess savings likely would continue to support consumption spending for a while. a couple of other participants, however, commented that excess savings, particularly among low-income households, appeared to be lower and declining more rapidly than previously thought or that the savings, the majority of which appeared to be held by higher-income households, might continue to be largely unspent. several participants remarked that budgets were stretched for low-to-moderate-income households and that many consumers were shifting their spending to less expensive alternatives. they also observed that many households were increasingly using credit to finance spending. overall, participants assessed that there was considerable uncertainty around the consumer spending outlook. participants commented that higher mortgage interest rates had notably restrained housing activity and that they expected housing activity to remain weak. a couple of participants remarked on anecdotes or concerns from builder contacts about contract cancellations by purchasers no longer able to qualify for loans at higher interest rates. with regard to the business sector, participants noted that growth in investment spending appeared modest and was being restrained by high borrowing costs and an outlook for slow growth of final demand, although views on investment prospects varied across businesses and districts. based on discussions with district contacts as well as a survey of firms’ chief financial officers, some participants commented that while businesses were generally optimistic about their own prospects, they expressed increasing concern about the general economic outlook for 2023. participants noted signs of continued easing in supply bottlenecks, with a couple citing district contacts’ reports of declines in shipping costs and delivery times. even so, participants remarked that the improvements in supply chains had not been uniform and supply shortages remained for some types of goods. participants also discussed the developments page 8 federal open market committee  in energy and agricultural sectors. several participants commented that they saw diminished risks of severe disruption from the european union’s embargo and the group of seven’s price cap on russian oil exports. a couple of participants noted that high costs for inputs like diesel, feed, and fertilizer were creating challenges for the agricultural sector. participants observed that the labor market had remained very tight, with the unemployment rate near a historically low level, robust payroll gains, a high level of job vacancies, and elevated nominal wage growth. several participants commented that there were tentative signs of labor market imbalances improving, including declines in job openings and quits over the second half of 2022 as well as reports from district contacts that they were seeing more qualified job applicants for open positions than earlier in the year. some participants pointed out that payroll gains had remained robust even as they slowed in recent months. nevertheless, they noted that some other measures of employment—such as those based on the bureau of labor statistics’ household survey and the quarterly census of employment and wages—suggested that job growth in 2022 may have been weaker than indicated by payroll employment. participants generally concluded that there remained a large imbalance between labor supply and labor demand, as indicated by the still-large number of job openings and elevated nominal wage growth. participants commented that labor demand had remained strong to date despite the slowdown in economic growth, with a few remarking that some business contacts reported that they would be keen to retain workers even in the face of slowing demand for output because of their recent experiences of labor shortages and hiring challenges. with the labor force participation rate little changed since the beginning of 2022, some participants commented that labor supply appeared to be constrained by structural factors such as early retirements, reduced availability or increased cost of childcare, more costly transportation, and reduced immigration. under an appropriately restrictive path of monetary policy, participants expected labor market supply and demand to come into better balance over time, easing upward pressures on nominal wages and prices. in the context of achieving the committee’s broad-based and inclusive maximum-employment goal, a number of participants commented that as the labor market moved into better balance, the unemployment rate for some demographic groups—particularly african americans and hispanics—would likely increase by more than the national average. with inflation still well above the committee’s longerrun goal of 2 percent, participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high. participants concurred that the inflation data received for october and november showed welcome reductions in the monthly pace of price increases, but they stressed that it would take substantially more evidence of progress to be confident that inflation was on a sustained downward path. participants noted that core goods prices declined in the october and november cpi data, consistent with easing supply bottlenecks. some participants also noted that, by some measures, firms’ markups were still elevated and that a continued subdued expansion in aggregate demand would likely be needed to reduce remaining upward pressure on inflation. regarding housing services inflation, many participants observed that measures of rent based on new leases were indicating a deceleration, which would be reflected in the measures of shelter inflation with some lag. participants noted that, in the latest inflation data, the pace of increase for prices of core services excluding shelter—which represents the largest component of core pce price inflation—was high. they also remarked that this component of inflation has tended to be closely linked to nominal wage growth and therefore would likely remain persistently elevated if the labor market remained very tight. consequently, while there were few signs of adverse wage-price dynamics at present, they assessed that bringing down this component of inflation to mandate-consistent levels would require some softening in the growth of labor demand to bring the labor market back into better balance. participants observed that measures from surveys of households and businesses as well as from financial markets generally indicated that longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored, while short-term inflation expectations had come down. however, participants stressed that the committee’s ongoing monetary policy tightening to achieve a stance that will be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent is essential for ensuring that longer-term expectations remain well anchored. several participants commented that the longer inflation remained well above the 2 percent goal, the greater the risk that longer-term inflation expectations could become unanchored. such a development, if it materialized, would make it much more costly to bring inflation down to achieve the committee’s statutory objectives of maximum employment and price stability. participants noted that since the november meeting, financial conditions had eased, with the market-implied path for the federal funds rate beyond 2023 and longer- minutes of the meeting of december 13–14, 2022 page 9  term yields coming down noticeably. a few participants remarked that the current configuration of nominal yields, with longer-term yields lower than shorter-term yields, had historically preceded recessions and hence bore watching. however, a couple of them also noted that the current inversion of the yield curve could reflect, in part, that investors expect the nominal policy rate to decline because of a fall in inflation over time. participants generally noted that the uncertainty associated with their economic outlooks was high and that the risks to the inflation outlook remained tilted to the upside. participants cited the possibility that price pressures could prove to be more persistent than anticipated, due to, for example, the labor market staying tight for longer than anticipated. participants saw a number of uncertainties surrounding the outlook for inflation stemming from factors abroad, such as china’s relaxation of its zero-covid policies, russia’s continuing war against ukraine, and effects of synchronous policy firming by major central banks. a number of participants judged that the risks to the outlook for economic activity were weighted to the downside. they noted that sources of such risks included the potential for more persistent inflation inducing more restrictive policy responses, the prospect of unexpected negative shocks tipping the economy into a recession in an environment of subdued growth, and the possibility of households’ and businesses’ concerns about the outlook restraining their spending sufficiently to reduce aggregate output. in their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants concurred that the committee had made significant progress over the past year in moving toward a sufficiently restrictive stance of monetary policy. even so, participants agreed that inflation remained well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent, while the labor market remained very tight, contributing to upward pressures on wages and prices. against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting and to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that the committee issued in may. participants observed that a slowing in the pace of rate increases at this meeting would better allow the committee to assess the economy’s progress toward the committee’s goals of maximum employment and price stability, as monetary policy approached a stance that was sufficiently restrictive to achieve these goals. in discussing the policy outlook, participants continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate to achieve the committee’s objectives. in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, participants judged that it would be appropriate to take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. with inflation staying persistently above the committee’s 2 percent goal and the labor market remaining very tight, all participants had raised their assessment of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate relative to their assessment at the time of the september meeting. no participants anticipated that it would be appropriate to begin reducing the federal funds rate target in 2023. participants generally observed that a restrictive policy stance would need to be maintained until the incoming data provided confidence that inflation was on a sustained downward path to 2 percent, which was likely to take some time. in view of the persistent and unacceptably high level of inflation, several participants commented that historical experience cautioned against prematurely loosening monetary policy. in light of the heightened uncertainty regarding the outlooks for both inflation and real economic activity, most participants emphasized the need to retain flexibility and optionality when moving policy to a more restrictive stance. participants generally noted that the committee’s future decisions regarding policy would continue to be informed by the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, and that the committee would continue to make decisions meeting by meeting. participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective. a number of participants emphasized that it would be important to clearly communicate that a slowing in the pace of rate increases was not an indication of any weakening of the committee’s resolve to achieve its pricestability goal or a judgment that inflation was already on a persistent downward path. participants noted that, because monetary policy worked importantly through financial markets, an unwarranted easing in financial conditions, especially if driven by a misperception by the public of the committee’s reaction function, would complicate the committee’s effort to restore price stability. several participants commented that the medians of participants’ assessments for the appropriate path of the federal funds rate in the summary of economic projections, which tracked notably above market-based page 10 federal open market committee  measures of policy rate expectations, underscored the committee’s strong commitment to returning inflation to its 2 percent goal. participants discussed a number of risk-management considerations related to the conduct of monetary policy. many participants highlighted that the committee needed to continue to balance two risks. one risk was that an insufficiently restrictive monetary policy could cause inflation to remain above the committee’s target for longer than anticipated, leading to unanchored inflation expectations and eroding the purchasing power of households, especially for those already facing difficulty making ends meet. the other risk was that the lagged cumulative effect of policy tightening could end up being more restrictive than is necessary to bring down inflation to 2 percent and lead to an unnecessary reduction in economic activity, potentially placing the largest burdens on the most vulnerable groups of the population. participants generally indicated that upside risks to the inflation outlook remained a key factor shaping the outlook for policy. a couple of participants noted that risks to the inflation outlook were becoming more balanced. participants generally observed that maintaining a restrictive policy stance for a sustained period until inflation is clearly on a path toward 2 percent is appropriate from a risk-management perspective. committee policy action in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators pointed to modest growth in spending and production. members also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. members agreed that inflation had remained elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. members observed that russia’s war against ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship. they also agreed that the war and related events were contributing to upward pressure on inflation and were weighing on global economic activity. members concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. members agreed that the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4¼ to 4½ percent. members anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. members agreed that, in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, they would take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, members agreed that they would continue reducing the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve's balance sheet that were issued in may. all members affirmed that the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective december 15, 2022, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 4¼ to 4½ percent. • conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 4.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 4.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. minutes of the meeting of december 13–14, 2022 page 11  • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures. russia’s war against ukraine is causing tremendous human and economic hardship. the war and related events are contributing to upward pressure on inflation and are weighing on global economic activity. the committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4¼ to 4½ percent. the committee anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate in in taking this action, the board approved requests to establish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the fed5 order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. in determining the pace of future increases in the target range, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities, as described in the plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet that were issued in may. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, james bullard, susan m. collins, lisa d. cook, esther l. george, philip n. jefferson, loretta j. mester, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 4.4 percent, effective december 15, 2022. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve a ½ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 4.5 percent, effective december 15, 2022. 5 it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, january 31– eral reserve banks of boston, new york, philadelphia, cleveland, richmond, atlanta, chicago, st. louis, minneapolis, kansas city, dallas, and san francisco. page 12 federal open market committee  february 1, 2023. the meeting adjourned at 10:35 a.m. on december 14, 2022. notation vote by notation vote completed on november 22, 2022, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on november 1–2, 2022.  james a. clouse secretary 
e february 1, 2023 chair powell. good afternoon, and welcome. my colleagues and i understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we are strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. over the past year, we have taken forceful actions to tighten the stance of monetary policy. we have covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our rapid tightening so far are yet to be felt. even so, we have more work to do. price stability is the responsibility of the federal reserve and serves as the bedrock of our economy. without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. in particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of labor market conditions that benefit all. today, the fomc raised our policy interest rate by 25 basis points. we continue to anticipate that ongoing increases will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. in addition, we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. restoring price stability will likely require maintaining a restrictive stance for some time. i will have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. the u.s. economy slowed significantly last year, with real gdp rising at a below-trend pace of 1 percent. recent indicators point to modest growth of spending and production this quarter. consumer spending appears to be expanding at a subdued pace, in part reflecting tighter financial conditions over the past year. activity in the housing sector continues to weaken, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. despite the slowdown in growth, the labor market remains extremely tight, with the unemployment rate at a 50-year low, job vacancies still very high, and wage growth elevated.  job gains have been robust, with employment rising by an average of 247,000 jobs per month over the last three months. although the pace of job gains has slowed over the course of the past year and nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, the labor market continues to be out of balance. labor demand substantially exceeds the supply of available workers, and the labor force participation rate has changed little from a year ago. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. over the 12 months ending in december, total pce prices rose 5.0 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 4.4 percent. the inflation data received over the past three months show a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of increases. and, while recent developments are encouraging, we will need substantially more evidence to be confident that inflation is on a sustained downward path. despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. but that’s not grounds for complacency. although inflation has moderated recently, it remains too high. the longer the current bout of high inflation continues, the greater the chance that expectations of higher inflation will become entrenched. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks that inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective.  at today’s meeting, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points, bringing the target range to 4½ to 4¾ percent. and we are continuing the process of significantly reducing the size of our balance sheet. with today’s action, we have raised interest rates by 4½ percentage points over the past year. we continue to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. we are seeing the effects of our policy actions on demand in the most interest-sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing. it will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. in light of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy and the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, the committee decided to raise interest rates by 25 basis points today, continuing the step-down from last year’s rapid pace of increases. shifting to a slower pace will better allow the committee to assess the economy’s progress toward our goals as we determine the extent of future increases that will be required to attain a sufficiently restrictive stance. we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, taking into account the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. we have been taking forceful steps to moderate demand so that it comes into better alignment with supply. our overarching focus is using our tools to bring inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum  employment and stable prices over the longer run. the historical record cautions strongly against prematurely loosening policy. we will stay the course, until the job is done. to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you, and i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. chris. christopher rugaber. chris rugaber, the associated press. thank you for doing this. as you know, financial conditions have loosened since the fall with bond yields falling, which has also brought down mortgage rates, and the stock market posted a solid gain in january. does that make your job of combating inflation harder? and could you see lifting rates higher than you otherwise would to offset the increase in—or to offset the easing of financial conditions? chair powell. so it is important that overall financial conditions continue to reflect the policy restraint that we’re putting in place in order to bring inflation down to 2 percent. and, of course, financial conditions have tightened very significantly over the past year. i would say that our focus is not on short-term moves but on sustained changes to broader financial conditions. and it is our judgment that we’re not yet at a sufficiently restrictive policy stance, which is why we say that we expect ongoing hikes will be appropriate. of course, many things affect financial conditions—not just our policy. and we will take into account overall financial conditions along with many other factors as we set policy. michelle smith. rachel.  rachel siegel. hi, chair powell, thank you for taking our questions. rachel siegel from the washington post. over the last quarter, we’ve seen a deceleration in prices, in wages, and a fall in consumer spending, all while the unemployment rate has been able to stay at a historic low. does this, at all, change your view of how much the unemployment rate would need to go up, if at all, to see inflation come down to the levels you’re looking for? chair powell. so i would say it is a good thing that the disinflation that we have seen so far has not come at the expense of a weaker labor market. but i would also say that that disinflationary process that you now see under way is really at an early stage. what you see is, really, in the goods sector you see inflation now coming down because supply chains have been fixed, demand is shifting back to services, and shortages have been abated. so you see that. in the other—in the housing services sector, we expect inflation to continue moving up for a while but then to come down, assuming that [rent increases associated with] new leases continue to be lower. so, in those two sectors, you’ve got a good story. the issue is that we have a large sector called nonhousing service—core nonhousing services, where we don’t see disinflation yet. but i would say that, so far, what we see is progress but without any weakening in labor market conditions. rachel siegel. has your—i’m sorry. chair powell. go ahead. rachel siegel. has your expectation for where the unemployment rate might go changed since december? chair powell. no. we’re going to write down new forecasts at the march meeting, and we’ll see at that time. i will say that it is gratifying to see the disinflationary process now  getting under way, and we continue to get strong labor market data. so—but, you know, we’ll update those forecasts in march. michelle smith. neil. neil irwin. hi, chair powell. neil irwin with axios. you and some of your colleagues have emphasized the possibility that job openings could come down and that would let some of the air out of the labor market without major job losses. we saw the opposite in the december jolts this morning. job openings are actually rising. that also coincided with slowdown in wage inflation. do you believe that openings are an important indicator to be studying to understand where the labor market is and where wage inflation might be heading? chair powell. so you’re right about the data, of course. what we did see—we’ve seen average hourly earnings and now the employment cost index abating a little bit still off of their highs of six months ago and more but still at levels that are fairly elevated. the job openings number has—in jolts, has been quite volatile recently. yeah, i did see that it moved up—back up this morning. i do think that it’s probably an important indicator. the ratio, i guess, is back up to 1.9 job openings to unemployed people, people who are looking for work. so it’s an indicator, but nonetheless, we—you’re right, we do see wages moving down. if you look across the rest of the labor market, you still see very high payroll job creation. and, you know, quits are still at an elevated level. so many, many—by many, many indicators, the job market is still very strong. michelle smith. colby, and then howard. colby smith. thank you. colby smith with the financial times. given the economic data since the december meeting, is the trajectory for the fed funds rate in the most  recent sep still the best guidepost for the policy path forward? or does ongoing now mean more than two rate rises now? chair powell. so you’re right. at the december meeting, we all wrote down our best estimates of what we thought the ultimate level would be, and that’s obviously back in december. and the median for that was between 5 and 5¼ percent. at the march meeting, we’re going to update those assessments. we did not update them today. we did, however, continue to say that we believe ongoing rate hikes will be appropriate to attain a sufficiently restrictive stance of policy to bring inflation back down to 2 percent. we think we’ve covered a lot of ground, and financial conditions have certainly tightened. i would say we still think there’s work to do there. we haven’t made a decision on exactly where that will be. i think, you know, we’re going to be looking carefully at the incoming data between now and the march meeting and then the may meeting. i don’t feel a lot of certainty about where that will be. it could certainly be higher than we’re writing down right now. if we come to the view that we need to write down to, you know, to move rates up beyond what we said in december, we would certainly do that. at the same time, if the data come in, in the other direction, then we’ll, you know, we’ll make data-dependent decisions at coming meetings, of course. colby smith. just as a quick follow-up, how are you viewing the kind of balance of risk between those two options of, you know, the likelihood of maybe falling short of that or going beyond that level? chair powell. i guess i would say it this way. i continue to think that it’s very difficult to manage the risk of doing too little and finding out in 6 or 12 months that we actually were close but didn’t get the job done. inflation springs back, and we have to go back in. and now, you really do worry about expectations getting unanchored and that kind of thing. this is a  very difficult risk to manage, whereas i—of course, we have no incentive and no desire to overtighten. but we, you know, if we feel like we’ve gone too far, we can certainly—and inflation is coming down faster than we expect, then we have tools that would work on that. so i do think that, in this situation, where we have still the highest inflation in 40 years, you know, the job is not fully done. as i started to mention earlier, we have a sector that represents 56 percent of the core inflation index where we don’t see disinflation yet. so we don’t see it. it’s not happening yet. inflation in the core services ex. housing is still running at 4 percent on a 6- and 12-month basis. so there’s not—nothing happening there. in the other two sectors representing, you know, less than 50 percent, you actually, i think, now have a story that is credible, that’s coming together, although you don’t actually see disinflation yet in housing services, but it’s in the pipeline, right? so, for the third sector, we don’t see anything here. so i think it would be premature—it would be very premature to declare victory or to think that we’ve really got this. we need to see—our goal, of course, is to bring inflation down. and how do we get that done? there are many, many factors driving inflation in that sector, and they should be coming into play to have inflation—the disinflationary process begin in that sector. but, so far, we don’t see that. and i think until we do, we see ourselves as having a lot of work left to do. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. hi, howard schneider with reuters, and thanks as usual. so i just wanted to connect a couple of dots here. the statement made a number of changes that seem to be saying things are getting better. you’re saying inflation has eased that’s new. you’ve taken out references to the war in ukraine that’s causing price increases. you’ve taken out references to the pandemic. you’ve eliminated all the reasons that you said prices were  being driven higher, yet that’s not mapping to any change in how you describe policy. we still have ongoing increases to come. so i’m wondering, why is that the case? and does it have more to do with uncertainty around the outlook or more to do with you not wanting to give a very overeager market a reason to get ahead of itself and overreact? chair powell. so i guess i would say it this way. we can now say, i think, for the first time that the disinflationary process has started. we can see that. and we see it, really, in goods prices so far. goods prices is a big sector. we—this is what we thought would happen since the very beginning, and now here it is actually happening, and for the reasons we thought. we—you know, it’s supply chains, it’s shortages, and it’s demand revolving back towards services. so this is a good thing. this is a good thing. but that’s, you know, around a quarter of the pce price index—core pce price index. so the second sector is housing services, and that’s driven by very different things. and we—as i mentioned, with housing services, we expect, and other forecasters expect, that measured inflation will continue moving up for several months but will then come down, assuming that [rent increases associated with] new leases continue to be soft. and we do assume that. so we think that that’s sort of in the pipeline. and we actually see disinflation in the goods sector, and we see it in the pipeline for two sectors that amount to a little less than half. so this is good. and we note that when we say inflation is coming down that this is good. we expect to see that that disinflation process will be seen, we hope soon, in the core goods ex. housing—sorry, the core services ex. housing sector that i talked about. we don’t see it yet. it’s—you know, it’s seven or eight different kinds of services, not all of them are the same. and, you know, we have a sense of what’s going on in each of those different subsections. probably the biggest part of it, probably 60 percent of that is, you know, research would show is sensitive to slack in the economy and so the labor market will probably be  important. some of the other ones it’s—the labor market is not going to be important. many other factors will drive it. in any case, we don’t see disinflation in that sector yet. and i think we need to see that it’s the majority of the core pce index, which is the thing that we think is the best predictor of headline pce, which is [the price series that we associate with] our mandate. so it’s not that we’re not—we’re neither optimistic nor pessimistic. we’re just telling you that we don’t see inflation moving down yet in that large sector. i think we will fairly soon, but we don’t see it yet. until we do, i think we—you know, we see ourselves, we’ve got to be honest with ourselves, but we see ourselves as having perhaps more persistent—we’ll see more persistent inflation in that sector, which will take longer to get down. and we’re just going to have to—we have to complete the job. you know, that’s what we’re here for. michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. nick timiraos, the wall street journal. chair powell, you observed several years ago that we learned we can have a low unemployment rate without above-target inflation. and we have learned lately that inflation can come down from its uncomfortably high level despite a historically low unemployment rate. given that, and given how much you did over the last year, why do you think further rate increases are needed? why not stop here and see what transpires in the coming months before raising rates again? chair powell. so we’ve—you know, we’ve raised rates 4½ percentage points, and we’re talking about a couple of more rate hikes to get to that level we think is appropriately restrictive. and why do we think that’s probably necessary? we think, because inflation is still running very hot. we’re, of course, taking into account long and variable lags, and we’re thinking about that. it really—the story we’re telling about inflation is to ourselves, and the way we understand it is basically the three things that i’ve just gone through a couple of times. and,  again, we don’t see it affecting the services sector ex. housing yet. but, i mean, i think our assessment is that we’re not very far from that level. we don’t know that, though. we don’t know that. so i think we’re—you know, we’re living in a world of significant uncertainty. i would look across the rate—the spectrum of rates and see that real rates are now positive by— you know, by an appropriate set of measures are positive across the yield curve. i think policy is restrictive. we’re trying to make a fine judgment about how much is restrictive enough. that’s all. and we’re going to—you know, that’s why we’re slowing down to 25 basis points. we’re going to be carefully watching the economy and watching inflation and watching the progress of the disinflationary process. nick timiraos. did you or your colleagues discuss the conditions for a pause at this meeting this week? chair powell. we—you know, you’ll see that the minutes will come out in three weeks, and we’ll give you a lot of detail. i—you know, we spend a lot of time talking about the path ahead and the state of the economy. and i wouldn’t want to start to drive the—describe all the details there, but that was the sense of the discussion, was really talking quite a bit about the path forward. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. i wanted to ask about the debt ceiling. given that we’ve now hit up against it, i was wondering if the u.s. goes past the x date, will the fed do whatever the treasury directs as it relates to making payments as the fiscal agent or will it do its own analysis of any legal constraints? chair powell. so your question is, would we—say your question again.  victoria guida. will the fed do what treasury directs as it relates to making payments or will it do its own analysis of any legal constraints? chair powell. so you’re really asking about—you’re asking about prioritization, in effect, is what— victoria guida. yes. yes. chair powell. okay. so i feel like i have to say this. there’s only one way forward here, and that is for congress to raise the debt ceiling so that the united states government can pay all of its obligations when due. and any deviations from that path would be highly risky and that no one should assume that the fed can protect the economy from the consequences of failing to act in a timely manner. in terms of our relationship with the treasury, we are their fiscal agent. and i’m just going to leave it at that. victoria guida. are you actively doing any planning of what might happen in the event that that would happen? chair powell. i’m just going to leave it at that. this is a matter that’s to be resolved between, really—it’s really congress’ job to raise the debt ceiling. and i gather there are discussions happening, but they don’t involve us. we’re not involved in those discussions. so we’re the fiscal agent. michelle smith. jeanna and then steve. jeanna smialek. jeanna smialek from the new york times. thanks for taking our questions. i wonder, was there any discussion today of the possibility of pausing rate increases and then restarting them? lorie logan from the federal reserve bank of dallas seemed to  suggest that would be a possibility in a recent speech. and i wonder if that view is broadly shared on the committee. chair powell. so the committee obviously did not see this as the time to pause. we judged that the appropriate, you know, thing to do at this meeting was to raise the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. and we said that we continue to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate in order to attain that stance of sufficiently restrictive monetary policy that will bring inflation down to 2 percent. so that’s the judgment that we made. you know, we’re going to write down new forecasts in march, and we’ll—you know, we’ll certainly be looking at the incoming data as everyone else will. jeanna smialek. sorry, i should have been clearer. i mean, would it be possible to take a meeting off, for example, and then resume? you know, could you, rather than just doing at every meeting that move, go a little bit more slowly, take some gaps in between moves? chair powell. i mean, i think this is not something that the committee is thinking about or exploring in any kind of detail. in principle, though, you know, we used to—the thing we used to do was go every other meeting, if you remember, 25 basis points, and that was considered a fast pace. so i think a lot of options are available. and i mean, you saw what the bank of canada did and, you know, they left it that they’re willing to raise rates after pausing. but this is not something that the federal open market committee is on the point of deciding right now. michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. steve liesman, cnbc. mr. chairman, the sep has the pce inflation rate in 2023 at 3.1 percent. meanwhile, the three-month annualized pce is 2.1 percent, and you’ve achieved this without going to your 5.1 percent funds rate, which is what you have  penciled in for this year. and you’ve also achieved it without the 1 percentage point increase in the unemployment rate, which you have penciled in for this year. i’m wondering if you’ve considered the idea of whether or not your understanding of the inflation dynamic may be wrong, and it’s possible to achieve these things without raising rates that high and also without the surge in unemployment. and, specifically, i wonder if you might comment on the speech given by vice chair lael brainard, who said, “to the extent that inputs other than wages may be responsible in part for important price increases for some nonhousing services, an unwinding of these factors.” in other words, it may not be wages. the idea that it may not require unemployment rising to get this sector of inflation under control. thanks. chair powell. so a couple of things. first, on the forecast, if—you’re right—if you take very short-term three-month, say, measures of pce—core pce inflation, they’re quite low right now. but that’s because that’s driven by, you know, significantly negative readings from goods inflation. most forecasters would think that the significantly negative readings will be transitory and that goods inflation will move up fairly soon, back up to its longer-run trend of something around zero, something like that. so a lot of forecasts would call for core pce to go back up to 4 percent by the middle of the year, for example. so that’s really where the sustainable level is. it’s more like at 4 percent. so that would suggest there’s work left to do. you know, let’s say inflation does come down much faster than we expect, which is possible. as i mentioned, you know, obviously our policy is data dependent. we would take that into account. in terms of the non—sorry, the core nonhousing services, as i mentioned earlier, it’s a very diverse sector, six or seven sectors. and so sectors that represent 55 or 60 percent of that—  subsectors of that sector are—we think are sensitive to slack in the economy, sensitive to the labor market in a way, but some of the other sectors are not. and, for example, you know, financial services is a big sector that’s really not driven by labor markets—wages. so that’s why i said there are a number of things that will affect—take restaurants, right? so, clearly, labor is important for restaurants but so are food prices. and, you know, transportation services is going to be driven by fuel prices, for example. so there are lots of things in that mix that will drive inflation. i would say overall, though, my own view would be that you’re not going to have, you know, a sustainable return to 2 percent inflation in that sector without a better balance in the labor market. and i don’t know what that will require in terms of increased unemployment, your question. i do think there are a number of dimensions through which the labor market can soften. and so far, we’ve got—as i mentioned, in goods, we have inflation moving down without the softening in the labor market. i think most forecasters would say that unemployment will probably rise a bit from here. but i still think—i continue to think that there’s a path to getting inflation back down to 2 percent without a really significant economic decline or a significant increase in unemployment. and that’s because the—you know, the setting we’re in is quite different. the inflation that we originally got was very much a collision between very strong demand and hard supply constraints, not something that you really have seen in prior— you know, in prior business cycles. and so now we see goods inflation coming down for the reasons we thought, and we understand why housing inflation will come down. and i think will—a story will emerge on the nonhousing services sector soon enough. but i think there is— there’s ongoing disinflation, and we don’t yet see weakening in the labor market. so we’ll have to see. steve liesman. can we get there with 5 percent?  chair powell. certainly possible. yeah. absolutely it’s possible. you know, it’s a question—no one really knows. i think it’s because this is not like the other business cycles in so many ways. it may well be that as—yeah, as—that it will take more slowing than we expect—than i expect to get inflation down to 2 percent. but i don’t—that’s not my base case. my base case is that the economy can return to 2 percent inflation without a really significant downturn or a really big increase in unemployment. i think that’s a possible outcome. i think many, many forecasters would say it’s not the most likely outcome. but i would say there’s a chance of it. michelle smith. michael. michael mckee. michael mckee from bloomberg tv and radio. i’d like to pick up on what you were just saying about a substantial downturn and ask, with the full weight of your tightening not in place yet and with the progress against inflation, there’s still a lot of talk about very, very slow growth going forward in 2023. and the recession indicators are all suggesting that we are going to see recession this year. so i’m wondering if you’ve changed your view or you have a more nuanced view of what you think the danger to economic growth is going forward and whether you’re very close to perhaps tipping it into the wrong place, which calls for more restraint on your part. chair powell. so i do think you—most forecasts and, you know, my own assessment would be that that growth will continue—positive growth will continue but at a subdued pace as it did last year. we had growth of—gdp growth of 1 percent last year and also final sales growth, which we think is a better indicator, of about 1 percent. i think, you know, most forecasts and certainly my assessment would be that growth will continue at a fairly subdued level this year. there are other factors, though, that need to be considered. you will  have seen that the global picture is improving a bit, and that will matter for us, potentially. the labor market remains very, very strong, and that’s job creation, that’s wages. as inflation does come down, sentiment will improve. you also—state and local governments are really flush these days with, you know, money, and many of them are considering tax cuts or even sending checks. so i think that’s going to support—they’re also spending a lot. there’s a lot of spending coming in the construction pipeline, both private and public. and so that’s going to support economic activity. so i think there’s a good chance that those factors will help support positive growth this year. and that’s my base case, is that there will be positive growth this year. michelle smith. okay, rich. rich miller. thank you. rich miller from bloomberg. first off, how are you doing? chair powell. fine. thanks. fine. rich miller. good. second off, i think, earlier on in the press conference, you said you need to see substantially more evidence of inflation coming down. can you give us some idea of what you’re thinking of? you mentioned three months—that we’ve seen three months in a row. governor waller suggested he might want to see six months. and so is it just the inflation data, or do you have to see the labor market coming back into better balance to have that “substantially more evidence” metric? chair powell. so i don’t think there’s, you know, going to be a light switch flipped or anything like that. i think it’s just an accumulating—accumulation of evidence. so, of course, we’ll be looking—by the time of the march meeting, we’ll have two more employment reports, two more cpi reports, and we’ll be looking at those carefully as all of us will. and we’ll be asking ourselves, what are they telling us? and soon after that, we’ll have another eci wage  report, which, as you know, is a report that we like because it adjusts for composition and it’s very complete. and, you know, the one we got, i guess it was yesterday, was some—was constructive. it’s—you know, it shows wages coming down but still at a high level. they’re still at a level that’s way above—well above where they were before the pandemic. so i don’t want to put a number on it in terms of months, but as the accumulated evidence comes in, it’s going to be reflected in our assessment of the outlook, and that will be reflected in our policy over time. but i will say, though, we—you know, it is our job to restore price stability and achieve 2 percent inflation for the benefit of the american public. we’re not—market participants have a very different job. it’s a fine job. it’s a great job. in fact, i did that job for years but in one form or another. but, you know, we have to deliver that. and so we are strongly resolved that we will, you know, complete this task because we think it has benefits that will, you know, support economic activity and benefit the public for many, many years. michelle smith. edward. edward lawrence. thank you, michelle. thank you, fed chairman, for taking the questions. so you’ve talked about we had solid job growth. edward lawrence from fox business, by the way. we had solid job growth, a slight falling in the increase in consumer spending. it seems so far it’s been relatively mild from the economy to go to—from a 9.1 percent cpi inflation to 6.5 percent cpi inflation. is the hard part yet to come to go from 6.5 to 2? chair powell. i don’t think we know, honestly. you know, the—so we, of course, expected goods inflation to start coming down by the end of 2021, and it didn’t come down all through ’22. and now it’s coming down, and it’s come down pretty fast. so i would say these are—this is not a standard business cycle where you can look at the last 10 times there was a  global pandemic and we shut the economy down and congress did what it did and we did what we did. it’s just—it’s unique. so i think certainty is just not appropriate here. inflation—it’s just harder to forecast inflation. it may come down faster. it may take longer to come down. and, you know, our job is to deliver inflation back to target, and we will do that. but i think we’re going to be cautious about declaring victory and, you know, sending signals that we think that the game is won because, you know, it’s—we’ve got a long way to go. it’s just—it’s the early stages of disinflation. and it’s most welcome to be able to say that we are now in disinflation, but that’s great. but we just see that it has to spread through the economy and that it’s going to take some time. that’s all. edward lawrence. do you—how long do you see then, the federal funds rate remaining at this elevated level? chair powell. you know, so—again, my forecast and that of my colleagues as you will see from the sep and—i mean, there are many different forecasts, but, generally, it’s a forecast of slower growth, some softening in labor market conditions, and inflation moving down steadily but not quickly. and, in that case, if the economy performs broadly in line with those expectations, it will not be appropriate to cut rates this year, to loosen policy this year. of course, other people have forecasts with inflation coming down much faster, that’s a different thing. you know, if that happens—inflation comes down much faster, you know, then we’ll be seeing that, and it will be incorporated into our thinking about policy. michelle smith. simon. simon rabinovitch. thank you, chair powell. simon rabinovitch with the economist. may i ask a further question about the language around “ongoing increases?” that, of course, implies at least two further rate rises. if you look at fed fund and futures pricing, the  implication is that you’ll raise rates one more time and then pause. are you concerned about that divergence or do you think, if everything breaks right, is that a plausible outcome? chair powell. i’m not particularly concerned about the divergence, no, because it is largely due to the market’s expectation that inflation will move down more quickly. i think that’s the bigger part of that. so, again, as i just mentioned, we—you know, our forecasts— different participants have different forecasts, but, generally, those forecasts are for continued subdued growth, some softening in the labor market but not a recession, not a recession. and we have inflation moving down, you know, into the—somewhere in the mid-threes or maybe lower than that this year. we’ll update that in march, but that’s what we thought in december. markets are past that. they show inflation coming down, in some cases, much quicker than that. so we’ll just have to see. and we have a different view and—a different view, it’s a different forecast, really. and given our outlook, i just—i don’t see us cutting rates this year if we get—if our outlook turns true, as i mentioned just now. if we do see inflation coming down much more quickly, that’ll play into our policy setting, of course. michelle smith. scott. scott horsley. hi, chair powell. scott horsley from npr. one of the changes in the statement this month is that the committee is no longer listing public health as among the data points you’ll consider in assessing conditions. what should we make of that? does the federal reserve no longer see the pandemic as weighing on the economy? chair powell. that’s the general sense of it. look, we understand—i personally understand well that covid is still out there, but that it’s no longer playing an important role in our economy. and, you know, we’ve kept that statement in there for quite a while, and i think we just—we knew we would take it out at some point. there’s never a perfect time, but we  thought that—you know, people are handling it better, and the economy and the society are handling it better now. it doesn’t really need to be in a—you know, in the fed’s monthly, you know, postmeeting statement as an ongoing economic risk as opposed to, you know, a health issue. michelle smith. nancy. nancy marshall-genzer. hi, chair powell. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. i wanted to go back to another thing that fed vice chair lael brainard said recently. she said she doesn’t see signs of a wage–price spiral, and i’m wondering if you agree with that. chair powell. i do. yeah, i do. you don’t see that yet. but the whole point is, you know, if you—once you see it, you have a serious problem. that means that, effectively, in people’s decisionmaking, inflation has become a really salient issue. and once that happens— that’s what we can’t allow to happen. and, you know, so that’s why we worry that the longer we’re at this and the longer people are talking about inflation all day long, every day, you know, the more risk of something like that. but no, there’s not much—it’s more of a risk. it always has been more of a risk than anything else. by the way, i think it’s becoming less salient. and people are—you know, we pick that up in conversations. and i’ve seen some data, too, that show people are, you know, gradually—they’re glad that inflation is coming down. people really don’t like inflation. and as we see it coming down, that could also add a boost to economic activity. you look at the sentiment surveys now, and they’re very, very low with 3½ percent unemployment and, you know, high wage increases nominally by historical standards. why can that be? it has to be inflation, right? so i think once inflation is seen to be coming down in coming months, even you will also see a boost to sentiment, i hope.  nancy marshall-genzer. so that’s what you’re looking at most closely, is consumer expectations? chair powell. that’s at the very heart, is consumers and businesses that, you know, are the—essentially, we believe that expectations of future inflation are a very important part of the process of creating inflation. that’s a sort of bedrock belief. in one way or another, it has to be. we think it’s important. and, in this case, i would say, the risk eight months ago or so, longer-term inflation expectations had moved up. we moved quite vigorously last year. expectations are—seem to be well anchored, including at the shorter end now, not just the longer end. so it’s, you know—and that’s—i think that’s very reassuring. i think, you know, the markets have decided, and the public has decided, that inflation is going to come back down to 2 percent and it’s just a matter of us following through. that's immeasurably helpful to the process of getting inflation down. the fact that people now do generally believe that it will come down, that’ll be part of the process of getting it down. and it’s a very positive thing. michelle smith. greg. greg robb. thank you, chair powell. greg robb from marketwatch. in the minutes of the december meeting, there was a couple of sentences that struck people as important, when the committee said participants talked about this unwarranted easing of financial conditions was a risk and it would make your life harder to bring inflation down. i haven’t seen—heard you talk much about that today or in the statement. so i was wondering, has that concern eased among members, or is that still something you’re concerned about? thank you. chair powell. i would put it this way. it’s something that we monitor carefully. financial conditions didn’t really change much from the december meeting to now. they  mostly went sideways or up and down but came out in roughly the same place. it’s important that the markets do reflect the tightening that we’re putting in place. as we’ve discussed a couple times here, there’s a difference in perspective by some market measures on how fast inflation will come down. we’re just going to have to see. i mean, i’m not going to try to persuade people to have a different forecast, but our forecast is that it will take some time and some patience and that we’ll need to keep rates higher for longer. but we’ll see. michelle smith. brendan, for the last question. brendan pedersen. hi, chair powell. brendon pedersen with punchbowl news. i wanted to ask if the fed takes into account at all the debt ceiling when it comes to quantitative tightening, given the fact that rapid or faster quantitative tightening could bring us closer, faster to that drop-dead debt ceiling deadline. could it play in effect as we get closer to that drop-dead deadline this summer? chair powell. look, i—it’s very hard to think about all the different possible ramifications. and i think the answer is, basically, i don’t think there’s likely to be any important interaction between the two, because i believe congress will wind up acting, and—as it will and must, in the end, to raise the debt ceiling in a way that doesn’t risk, you know, the progress we’re making against inflation and the economy and the financial sector. i believe that that will happen. i believe it will happen. you know, we, of course, will monitor money market conditions carefully as—you know, as the process moves on. for example, the treasury general account will shrink down, and then it will grow back up. and we understand there’ll be lots of flows between there and the overnight repo facility and reserves. we understand all that. we’re watching it carefully. we’ll just be monitoring it. thank you very much.   NA
NA annual organizational matters 3 the agenda for this meeting reported that advices of the election of the following members and alternate members of the federal open market committee for a term beginning january 31, 2023, were received and that these individuals executed their oaths of office. the elected members and alternate members were as follows: john c. williams, president of the federal reserve bank of new york, with helen e. mucciolo, interim first vice president of the federal reserve bank of new york, as alternate patrick harker, president of the federal reserve bank of philadelphia, with thomas i. barkin, president of the federal reserve bank of richmond, as alternate austan d. goolsbee, president of the federal reserve bank of chicago, with loretta j. mester, president of the federal reserve bank of cleveland, as alternate lorie k. logan, president of the federal reserve bank of dallas, with raphael w. bostic, president of the federal reserve bank of atlanta, as alternate committee organizational documents are available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/rulesauthorizations.htm. 3 neel kashkari, president of the federal reserve bank of minneapolis, with mary c. daly, president of the federal reserve bank of san francisco, as alternate. by unanimous vote, the following officers of the committee were selected to serve until the selection of their successors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the committee in 2024: jerome h. powell john c. williams joshua gallin matthew m. luecke brian j. bonis michelle a. smith mark e. van der weide richard ostrander charles c. gray trevor a. reeve stacey tevlin beth anne wilson chair vice chair secretary deputy secretary assistant secretary assistant secretary general counsel deputy general counsel assistant general counsel economist economist economist shaghil ahmed roc armenter james a. clouse brian m. doyle eric m. engen beverly j. hirtle anna paulson andrea raffo chiara scotti 4 william wascher associate economists by unanimous vote, the committee selected the federal reserve bank of new york to execute transactions for the system open market account (soma). by unanimous vote, the committee selected patricia zobel to serve at the pleasure of the committee as deputy manager of the soma through february 20, 2023, and roberto perli and julie ann remache to serve at the pleasure of the committee as manager and deputy manager of the soma, respectively, effective february 21, 2023, on the understanding that these selections were subject to being satisfactory to the federal reserve bank of new york. secretary’s note: the federal reserve bank of new york subsequently sent advice that the selections indicated previously were satisfactory. chiara scotti’s selection was set to be effective upon her employment with the federal reserve bank of dallas. 4  page 4 federal open market committee as part of the annual review of the committee’s governance documents for open market operations and foreign currency transactions, the committee unanimously approved a new governance document titled “fomc authorizations and continuing directives for open market operations.”3 the new document includes (1) authorizations previously in the committee’s authorization for foreign currency operations and authorization for domestic open market operations; (2) a new “continuing directive for domestic open market operations,” which combines direction to the desk in the standing repurchase agreement facility and fima repurchase agreement facility resolutions with direction to the desk to continue to carry out other ongoing activities; (3) the foreign currency directive; and (4) two other existing documents related to contingency arrangements. the new unified document improves clarity and transparency in the governance of desk activities but does not make substantive changes to governance. the domestic policy directive released after each fomc meeting will have modest conforming changes going forward. ahead of the vote on policies relating to information security, external communications, and investment and trading, the chair commented on the critical importance of maintaining the public’s trust and confidence in the federal reserve as an institution and indicated that these policies were very important in that regard. all participants indicated support for, and agreed to abide by the requirements of, the program for security of fomc information (program), the fomc policy on external communications of committee participants, the fomc policy on external communications of federal reserve system staff, and the investment and trading policy for fomc officials. the committee voted unanimously to reaffirm all four policies without revision.3 as part of the committee’s annual organizational review process, all participants indicated support for the statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, and the committee voted unanimously to reaffirm it without revision.3 developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager pro tem turned first to a review of u.s. financial market developments. market participants generally expected u.s. economic growth to moderate this year, although there was a wide dispersion in views about the extent of a potential slowdown. market participants interpreted incoming data as pointing to moderating inflation risks. against this backdrop, market participants judged that the fomc would likely slow the pace of rate increases further at the current meeting, and respondents to the desk’s survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants widely expected the committee to implement a ¼ percentage point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate. survey respondents assessed that uncertainty around the likely peak level of the policy rate narrowed relative to the comparable results from the december surveys and, on average, placed significant probability on a target federal funds rate range close to 5 percent. a significant share of survey respondents anticipated that the committee would hold the policy rate stable for much of 2023. moderating inflation in the united states and improving global growth prospects lifted market sentiment. while most desk survey respondents expected subdued growth or a mild recession in 2023, market participants continued to see notable uncertainties ahead, including prospects for a deeper downturn or the potential for more persistent inflation. regarding the international outlook, signs of a faster reopening in china and a less severe downturn in europe eased concerns about global growth, contributing to a depreciation in the exchange value of the dollar and supporting optimism about emerging market economies. narrowing interest rate differentials between the united states and other advanced foreign economies also contributed to dollar depreciation, as some foreign central bank communications suggested a need for further monetary policy tightening to address inflation pressures. in addition, the bank of japan unexpectedly widened its yield curve control band at its december meeting to address market functioning issues in the market for japanese government bonds. over the period, some other central banks communicated that they were at or near a point where it would be appropriate to pause policy rate increases and assess the effects of cumulative policy tightening. the manager pro tem turned next to a discussion of money markets and federal reserve operations. money market rates were stable over the period, with the yearend passing smoothly. as expected, balances in the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility increased at year-end but quickly retraced. market participants generally expected usage of the on rrp facility to continue a downward trend in 2023, moderating the decline in reserve balances as the federal reserve’s holdings of securities continue to run off. should transitory pressures occur in money markets over the course of the year, the manager pro tem noted that the standing  minutes of the meeting of january 31–february 1, 2023 page 5 repurchase agreement (repo) facility and discount window would be available to help support effective monetary policy implementation. the manager noted that, over coming months, developments affecting the treasury general account (tga) and treasury financing could influence money market conditions. an increase in tga balances associated with april individual tax receipts could result in a temporary decline in reserve balances. in subsequent months, uncertainties associated with the debt limit could also be important. in particular, the treasury could increase bill issuance to rebuild tga balances once the debt limit is lifted, reducing reserves and potentially lifting money market rates. the manager pro tem noted that in recent months, investors in the on rrp facility had responded to small increases in money market rates by shifting balances into private investments, and that reductions in on rrp volumes may help smooth adjustments in money markets. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the january 31– february 1 meeting indicated that labor market conditions remained tight in december, with the unemployment rate at a historical low. consumer price inflation— as measured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—continued to step down in november and december but was still elevated. real gross domestic product (gdp) increased at a solid pace in the fourth quarter of last year. total nonfarm payroll employment increased solidly in december, although at a slower pace than in the previous two months. the unemployment rate moved back down to 3.5 percent in december. the unemployment rate for african americans was unchanged, and the unemployment rate for hispanics ticked up; the unemployment rates for both groups remained above the aggregate measure. the aggregate measures of both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio edged up. the private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, was flat in november and remained high. measures of nominal wage growth slowed at the end of last year but continued to be elevated. the three-month change in the employment cost index (eci) of hourly compensation in the private sector slowed to a 4.0 percent annual rate in december, while the three-month change measure of average hourly earnings (ahe) for all employees eased to an annual rate of 4.1 percent. over the 12 months ending in december, the eci increased 5.1 percent, and ahe rose 4.6 percent. consumer price inflation eased in november and december but remained elevated. total pce price inflation was 5.0 percent over the 12 months ending in december, 1.1 percentage points lower than the october figure. core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.4 percent over the 12 months ending in december, down 0.7 percentage point from its october reading. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 4.4 percent in december, 0.3 percentage point lower than in october. the latest surveybased readings on longer-term inflation expectations from the university of michigan surveys of consumers and the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations remained within the range of their values reported in recent months, while near-term measures of inflation expectations from these surveys moved down along with actual inflation. although real gdp expanded at an annual rate of 2.9 percent in the fourth quarter, real private domestic final purchases (pdfp)—which includes pce, residential investment, and business fixed investment—increased at a subdued annual rate of 0.2 percent. real gdp growth was bolstered especially by a large gain in inventory investment and a notable contribution from net exports, as imports fell more than exports. both inventories and net exports are volatile categories in aggregate spending. regarding production, u.s. manufacturing output declined sizably in both november and december. foreign economic growth slowed in the fourth quarter, weighed down by the covid-19-related slowdown in china and repercussions of russia’s war against ukraine. weaker global demand and a rebalancing from goods to services also resulted in a pronounced slowdown in manufacturing, which weighed on activity in emerging asia. in china, the pivot away from its zero-covid policy appears to have resulted in a rapid surge in virus cases late in the year, but also in a rebound in activity as restrictions were rapidly removed. in europe, the slowdown in economic growth was tempered by mild winter weather, which also prompted further declines in energy  page 6 federal open market committee prices. a decline in retail energy as well as food prices contributed to an easing in headline consumer price inflation in many foreign economies. with core inflation remaining elevated amid tight labor markets, however, many central banks continued to tighten monetary policy. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, the market-implied federal funds rate path was little changed for 2023 but moderately moved down further out. nominal treasury yields were little changed, while swaps-based inflation compensation measures fell notably. stock market indexes were slightly higher, and market volatility declined but remained slightly elevated. businesses and households continued to face elevated borrowing costs. credit quality remained strong overall, although there were some signs of deterioration for consumer loans. the market-implied federal funds rate path for 2023 was little changed, on net, during the intermeeting period but fell moderately beyond mid-2024. on net, nominal treasury yields were roughly unchanged, and swapsmarket-implied inflation compensation measures fell notably. broad stock price indexes ended the intermeeting period only slightly higher despite sizable fluctuations. equity prices fell sharply following the december fomc statement but recovered over the remainder of the period in response to data releases. the vix—the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—decreased somewhat but remained slightly above the median range of its historical distribution. spreads on investmentgrade and high-yield corporate bonds narrowed somewhat, on net, over the intermeeting period, while spreads on municipal bonds narrowed substantially. conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period, with the december increase in the target range for the federal funds rate and the associated increases in the federal reserve’s administered rates passing through quickly to overnight money market rates. in secured markets, repo rates were roughly the same as the on rrp offering rate but continued to occasionally print slightly higher around days with treasury bill and coupon settlements. daily takeup in the on rrp facility remained elevated, reflecting continued elevated assets under management (aum) for money market mutual funds (mmfs), ongoing uncertainty around the policy path, and limited supply of alternative investments such as treasury bills. net yields on mmfs rose further over the intermeeting period, mostly passing through the increase in administered rates. bank deposit rates gradually increased but continued to lag cumulative increases in the federal funds rate. over the intermeeting period, investor perceptions of an improved economic outlook in china and europe contributed to increases in foreign risky asset prices and weighed on the exchange value of the dollar. global equity indexes rose, supported in part by lower european natural gas prices and china’s decision to abandon its zero-covid policy. sovereign yields increased notably in the euro area and japan, reflecting more-restrictivethan-expected communications from the european central bank and the bank of japan’s decision to widen its yield curve control target band, respectively. in contrast, yields in other major advanced foreign economies were little changed on net. the staff’s broad dollar index declined over the intermeeting period, with larger declines against emerging market economy (eme) currencies amid significant inflows into eme-focused investment funds in january on improved investor sentiment. narrowing yield differentials between the united states and some advanced foreign economies also contributed to the depreciation of the dollar. in domestic credit markets, businesses and households continued to face elevated borrowing costs. yields for corporate bonds declined, while borrowing costs for leveraged loans were little changed at elevated levels. bank interest rates for commercial and industrial (c&i) loans continued to trend upward in the fourth quarter. yields on municipal bonds declined during the intermeeting period but remained above their historical average. residential mortgage rates were little changed over the intermeeting period and remained well above their levels in the previous tightening cycle, notwithstanding the decline from their peak in early november. interest rates on existing credit cards continued to increase in recent months, and interest rates on new auto loans also rose through mid-january. credit remained broadly available for businesses and households with strong credit quality but remained tight for lower-rated borrowers. lending standards tightened further for bank-dependent borrowers. issuance of corporate bonds was subdued in december before picking up somewhat in january. new launches of leveraged loans were notably subdued in december and january, likely reflecting soft investor demand and higher reference rates on floating-rate loans. in the january senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported having tightened c&i and commercial real estate (cre)  minutes of the meeting of january 31–february 1, 2023 page 7 lending standards over the previous three months. although c&i loans at banks continued to expand through december, they decelerated relative to earlier in the year, in line with tighter lending standards and weaker demand for c&i loans over the fourth quarter. cre loan growth on domestic banks’ balance sheets remained robust in the fourth quarter. meanwhile, issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities remained slow in november and december, amid high base interest rates and spreads. some tightening in lending conditions was also evident for small businesses, with the share of small firms reporting that it was more difficult to obtain credit compared with three months earlier continuing to trend up through december. credit was broadly available in the residential mortgage market for high-credit-score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. credit availability for households with lower credit scores was considerably tighter, though comparable to levels prevailing before the pandemic. purchase mortgage applications and refinance applications were both little changed over the intermeeting period. home equity line of credit (heloc) balances at banks continued to grow through the fourth quarter, on net, potentially reflecting homeowners using helocs as a preferred way of extracting home equity in the presence of high current mortgage rates. in the january sloos, banks reported tighter standards for all consumer loans. even so, total credit card balances increased at a solid pace in november, while auto loans grew modestly. overall, credit quality remained strong, although there was some deterioration for credit card and auto loan borrowers and some predictors of future credit quality worsened a bit further. the volume of corporate bond rating downgrades outpaced upgrades in december, although the level of downgrades remained moderate. leveraged loans experienced notable net rating downgrades in december, but the pace moderated in january. default rates on corporate bonds and leveraged loans remained low. measures of expected default probabilities for corporate bonds and leveraged loans remained elevated relative to their historical distributions. the credit quality of businesses that borrow from banks remained sound, on balance, although, in the january sloos, banks reported expecting a deterioration in the quality of business loans in their portfolio over 2023. delinquencies on small business loans continued to edge up in november but remained low relative to historical levels. the credit quality of households also remained strong, on balance, despite some signs of deterioration. delinquencies for federal housing administration mortgages increased slightly, but overall mortgage delinquency rates were still near pre-pandemic lows. delinquency rates for credit cards and auto loans continued to rise during the third quarter. while delinquency rates on credit cards were still relatively low, those on auto loans rose above pre-pandemic levels. in the january sloos, banks reported expecting a further deterioration in the quality of household loans in 2023, especially for consumer loans. the staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, characterized the financial vulnerabilities of the u.s. financial system as moderate. the staff judged that asset valuation pressures remained notable. in particular, the staff noted that measures of valuations in both residential and commercial property markets remained high, and that the potential for large declines in property prices remained greater than usual. in addition, the forward price-to-earnings ratio for s&p 500 firms remained above its median value despite the decline in equity prices over the past year. the staff assessed that valuation pressures had eased for corporate bonds and leveraged loans, as spreads in both markets had increased from recent lows. the staff assessed that vulnerabilities associated with household and business leverage remained moderate, noting that although measures of business leverage were at or near a historically high level, the ability of firms to service their debt has kept pace with rising debt loads and interest rates. household borrowing rose for borrowers with prime credit scores but declined for households with lower credit scores. vulnerabilities associated with financial leverage also remained moderate. in particular, risk-based capital ratios for banks increased slightly, a staff measure of leverage at life insurance companies remained relatively flat in recent quarters, and leverage among private credit funds has remained steady for several years. while measures of hedge fund leverage have decreased since the pandemic shock, the staff noted that leverage among the largest funds was on track to return to 2019 levels. vulnerabilities associated with funding risks were characterized as moderate. the rising rate environment has prompted inflows into prime retail mmfs, while aum at prime institutional funds, which have proved more sensitive to turmoil in the past, have grown much less. assets in open-end mutual funds that invest in less liquid  page 8 federal open market committee instruments like bank loans or high-yield corporate bonds have declined notably over the past year. in response to vulnerabilities at mmfs and open-end mutual funds, the securities and exchange commission has proposed rules to make these funds more resilient. staff economic outlook the forecast for the u.s. economy prepared by the staff for this fomc meeting had a somewhat higher path for the level of real gdp and a modestly lower path for the unemployment rate than in the december projection, reflecting both the recent data and a small additional boost to output from a lower projected path for the dollar. although recent data indicated that real gdp growth in the fourth quarter of 2022 was stronger than expected, real pdfp growth was weaker than previously forecast, and the large, unexpected boost to gdp growth from inventory investment was not projected to persist. in part reflecting the lagged effects of previous monetary policy tightening, the staff still projected real gdp growth to slow markedly this year and the labor market to soften. the staff forecast continued to include a pickup in real gdp growth starting next year, although projected output growth in 2024 and 2025 remains below the staff’s estimate of potential output growth. the level of real output was expected to move down to the staff’s estimate of potential near the end of 2025. likewise, the unemployment rate was projected to gradually move up to the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at the end of 2025. on a four-quarter change basis, total pce price inflation was forecast to be 2.8 percent in 2023, and core inflation was expected to be 3.2 percent, both lower than in the december projection. with the effects of supply–demand imbalances in goods markets expected to further unwind and labor and product markets projected to become less tight, the staff continued to forecast that inflation would decline further over 2024 and 2025. on a four-quarter change basis, core goods inflation was projected to move down further this year and then remain subdued, housing services inflation was expected to peak later this year and then move down, and core nonhousing services inflation was forecast to slow as nominal wage growth eased. with steep declines in consumer energy prices and a substantial moderation in food price inflation expected for this year, total inflation was projected to step down markedly this year and then to track core inflation over the following two years. in 2025, both total and core pce price inflation were expected to be near 2 percent. the sluggish growth in real private domestic spending expected this year and the persistently tight financial conditions were seen as tilting the risks to the downside around the baseline projection for real economic activity, and the staff still viewed the possibility of a recession sometime this year as a plausible alternative to the baseline. moreover, with core pce price inflation having slowed in recent months, along with the cumulative upward revisions to the core inflation projection over the past year and the expected softening in economic growth, the staff now viewed the risks around the baseline forecast for inflation this year as balanced. for beyond this year, the staff continued to view the risks around the inflation projection as skewed to the upside, reflecting concerns about the potential persistence of inflation. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that recent indicators pointed to modest growth in spending and production. nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate remained low. inflation had eased somewhat but remained elevated. participants recognized that russia’s war against ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship and was contributing to elevated global uncertainty. against this background, participants continued to be highly attentive to inflation risks. participants agreed that cumulative policy firming to date had reduced demand in the most interest-rate-sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing. participants observed that growth in economic activity in 2022 had been below its longer-run trend and expected that real gdp growth would slow further in 2023. while real gdp growth had rebounded in the second half of 2022, several participants noted that growth in pdfp had nearly stalled in the fourth quarter. with inflation remaining unacceptably high, participants expected that a period of below-trend growth in real gdp would be needed to bring aggregate demand into better balance with aggregate supply and thereby reduce inflationary pressures. some participants judged that recent economic data signaled a somewhat higher chance of continued subdued economic growth, with inflation falling over time to the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent, although some participants noted that the probability of the economy entering a recession in 2023 remained elevated.  minutes of the meeting of january 31–february 1, 2023 page 9 in their discussion of the household sector, participants observed that real consumer spending had declined in november and december—in part reflecting the tightening in financial conditions over the past year—and anticipated that consumption would likely grow at a subdued rate in 2023. participants noted that excess savings accumulated during the pandemic had continued to support consumption, although several participants remarked that the importance of this factor would likely wane over time as excess savings continued to be drawn down or eroded by inflation. a couple of participants observed that some consumers were shifting their spending to less expensive alternatives. a few participants noted the effects of higher interest costs in restraining consumption or inhibiting the ability of some households to repay their loans, while a couple of participants noted that inflation was eroding households’ purchasing power. however, a couple of participants noted that some states could return part of their sizable budget surpluses to households through tax cuts or rebates, which would provide support to consumption. participants agreed that activity in the housing market had continued to weaken, largely reflecting the increase in mortgage rates over the past year. regarding the business sector, participants observed that growth in business fixed investment spending had been subdued in the fourth quarter and was being restrained by past interest rate increases. a number of participants commented that supply bottlenecks continued to ease, although supply chain issues remained a challenge in some sectors. several participants remarked that the recent strong growth in inventory investment will likely slow; a couple of those participants noted that businesses appeared more confident that significant supply bottlenecks would not reemerge and might therefore choose to hold smaller inventories. some participants commented that the easing of covid-related lockdown restrictions in china or stronger-than-expected growth in economic activity in the euro area could provide support to final demand in the united states. participants agreed that the labor market remained very tight and assessed that labor demand substantially exceeded the supply of available workers. participants noted that the unemployment rate had returned to a historically low level in december, job vacancies remained high, and wage growth remained elevated. several participants noted that recent reductions in the workforces of some large technology businesses followed much larger increases over the previous few years and judged that these reductions did not appear to reflect wide- spread weakness in the demand for labor. a few participants remarked that some business contacts appeared keen to retain workers even in the face of slowing demand for output because of their recent experiences of labor shortages and hiring challenges. participants agreed that labor supply remained constrained by structural factors such as the effects from the pandemic, including those on early retirements, and the reduced availability and increased cost of childcare. nevertheless, participants noted tentative signs that imbalances between demand and supply in the labor market were improving, with job vacancies and payroll gains declining somewhat from high levels, the average number of hours worked falling, and growth in wages and employment costs slowing. some participants commented on the recent reduction in temporary employment, which previously had often preceded more widespread reductions in labor demand. under appropriate monetary policy, participants expected labor market demand and supply to come into better balance over time, easing upward pressure on nominal wages and prices. a number of participants commented on the importance of recognizing that, to the extent national unemployment increases, historical evidence indicates that even larger increases in the unemployment rate for some demographic groups—particularly african americans and hispanics—would be likely to occur. with inflation still well above the committee’s longerrun goal of 2 percent, participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high. a number of participants commented that the costs of elevated inflation are particularly high for lower-income households. participants noted that inflation data received over the past three months showed a welcome reduction in the monthly pace of price increases but stressed that substantially more evidence of progress across a broader range of prices would be required to be confident that inflation was on a sustained downward path. participants noted that core goods prices had declined notably over the previous few months as supply bottlenecks had eased but anticipated that price declines for this component would dissipate as the downward pressure on goods prices from resolving supply bottlenecks fades. participants judged that housing services inflation would likely begin to fall later this year, reflecting continued smaller increases, or potentially declines, in rents on new leases. participants agreed that they had observed less evidence of a slowdown in the rate of increase of prices for core services excluding housing, a category that accounts for more than half of the core pce price index. participants judged that as long as the labor market remained very  page 10 federal open market committee tight, wage growth in excess of 2 percent inflation and trend productivity growth would likely continue to put upward pressure on some prices in this component. a couple of participants observed that changes in wages tend to lag changes in prices, which can complicate the assessment of inflation pressures. a couple of participants remarked that the poor performance of labor productivity growth last year was restraining aggregate supply, which was contributing to imbalances between aggregate demand and aggregate supply and therefore to upward pressure on inflation. several participants noted the possibility that as consumers become more price sensitive, businesses might accept lower profit margins in an effort to maintain market share, which could reduce inflation temporarily. participants observed that indicators of short-term inflation expectations from surveys of households and businesses as well as from financial markets had come down and that longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored. a number of participants noted the importance of longer-term inflation expectations remaining anchored and remarked that the longer inflation remained elevated, the greater the risk of inflation expectations becoming unanchored. in that adverse scenario, it would be more costly to bring inflation down to achieve the committee’s statutory objectives of maximum employment and price stability. participants observed that financial conditions remained much tighter than in early 2022. however, several participants observed that some measures of financial conditions had eased over the past few months. a few participants noted that increased confidence among market participants that inflation would fall quickly appeared to contribute to declines in market expectations of the federal funds rate path beyond the near term. participants noted that it was important that overall financial conditions be consistent with the degree of policy restraint that the committee is putting into place in order to bring inflation back to the 2 percent goal. participants observed that the uncertainty associated with their outlooks for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation was high. regarding upside risks to inflation, participants cited a variety of factors, including the possibility that price pressures could prove to be more persistent than anticipated due to, for example, the labor market staying tight for longer than anticipated. participants also saw a number of upside risks surrounding the outlook for inflation stemming from factors abroad, such as china’s relaxation of its zero-covid policies and russia’s continuing war against ukraine. however, a few participants remarked that the risks to their inflation outlook had become more balanced. participants agreed that the risks to the outlook for economic activity were weighted to the downside. participants noted that sources of such risks included the prospect of unexpected negative shocks tipping the economy into a recession in an environment of subdued growth, the effects of synchronous policy firming by major central banks, and disruptions in the financial system and broader economy associated with concerns that the statutory debt limit might not be raised in a timely manner. in their discussion of issues related to financial stability, several participants discussed vulnerabilities in the financial system associated with higher interest rates, including the elevated valuations for some categories of assets, particularly in the cre sector; the susceptibility of some nonbank financial institutions to runs; and the effect of large, unrealized losses on some banks’ securities portfolios. a few participants commented that international stresses had the potential to transmit to the u.s. financial system. a number of participants noted the importance of orderly functioning of the market for u.s. treasury securities and stressed the importance of the appropriate authorities continuing to address issues related to the resilience of the market. although several participants noted that the federal reserve’s standing liquidity facilities could be helpful in addressing significant pressures in funding markets, should they arise, several participants also noted the challenges of addressing potential disruptions in u.s. core market functioning. a few participants remarked that recent failures of companies involved in crypto finance have had a limited effect on the broader financial system. these participants indicated that this limited effect reflected the minimal extent of the crypto market’s connections to the banking system thus far, consistent with the risks associated with many of these activities. several participants discussed the value of the federal reserve taking additional steps to understand the potential risks associated with climate change or to assess the materiality of such risks in the context of carrying out its responsibilities to evaluate risks in the banking system and broader financial system. a number of participants stressed that a drawn-out period of negotiations to raise the federal debt limit could pose significant risks to the financial system and the broader economy. in their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants concurred that the committee had made significant progress over the past year in moving toward a sufficiently restrictive stance of monetary policy. even so, participants agreed that,  minutes of the meeting of january 31–february 1, 2023 page 11 while there were recent signs that the cumulative effect of the committee’s tightening of the stance of monetary policy had begun to moderate inflationary pressures, inflation remained well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent and the labor market remained very tight, contributing to continuing upward pressures on wages and prices. against this backdrop, and in consideration of the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, almost all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting. many of these participants observed that a further slowing in the pace of rate increases would better allow them to assess the economy’s progress toward the committee’s goals of maximum employment and price stability as they determine the extent of future policy tightening that will be required to attain a stance that is sufficiently restrictive to achieve these goals. a few participants stated that they favored raising the target range for the federal funds rate 50 basis points at this meeting or that they could have supported raising the target by that amount. the participants favoring a 50-basis point increase noted that a larger increase would more quickly bring the target range close to the levels they believed would achieve a sufficiently restrictive stance, taking into account their views of the risks to achieving price stability in a timely way. all participants agreed that it was appropriate to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in its previously announced plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. in discussing the policy outlook, with inflation still well above the committee’s 2 percent goal and the labor market remaining very tight, all participants continued to anticipate that ongoing increases in the target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate to achieve the committee’s objectives. participants affirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective. in determining the extent of future increases in the target range, participants judged that it would be appropriate to take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. participants observed that a restrictive policy stance would need to be maintained until the incoming data provided confidence that inflation was on a sustained downward path to 2 percent, which was likely to take some time. participants discussed the heightened uncertainty regarding the economic outlook and a number of factors that could affect inflation and real economic activity. participants generally noted that the committee’s future decisions regarding policy would continue to be informed by the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. a number of participants observed that financial conditions had eased in recent months, which some noted could necessitate a tighter stance of monetary policy. participants also discussed a number of risk-management considerations related to the conduct of monetary policy. almost all participants observed that slowing the pace of rate increases at the current juncture would allow for appropriate risk management as the committee assessed the extent of further tightening needed to meet the committee’s goals. several of those participants observed that risks to the economic outlook were becoming more balanced. with inflation still well above the committee’s longer-run goal, participants generally noted that upside risks to the inflation outlook remained a key factor shaping the policy outlook, and that maintaining a restrictive policy stance until inflation is clearly on a path toward 2 percent is appropriate from a riskmanagement perspective. a number of participants observed that a policy stance that proved to be insufficiently restrictive could halt recent progress in moderating inflationary pressures, leading inflation to remain above the committee’s 2 percent objective for a longer period, and pose a risk of inflation expectations becoming unanchored. participants noted that the runoff of the balance sheet had been proceeding smoothly. a few participants observed that money markets could experience some temporary pressures as reserves declined if use of the federal reserve’s on rrp facility continued to remain high. they noted, however, that such pressures, should they occur, would likely cause an upward re-pricing of private money-market rates that could encourage market participants to reduce their use of the facility. committee policy actions in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators pointed to modest growth in spending and production. members also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. members agreed that inflation had eased somewhat but remained elevated. members concurred that russia’s war against ukraine was causing tremendous human and economic hardship and was contributing to elevated global uncertainty. members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks.  page 12 federal open market committee members agreed that the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4½ to 4¾ percent. members anticipated that ongoing increases in the target range would be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. members concurred that, in determining the extent of future increases in the target range, they would take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, members agreed that they would continue reducing the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. the committee remained strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to authorize and direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the soma in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective february 2, 2023, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 4½ to 4¾ percent. conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 4.75 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 4.55 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the discretion of the chair. • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation has eased somewhat but remains elevated. russia’s war against ukraine is causing tremendous human and economic hardship and is contributing to elevated global uncertainty. the committee is highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4½ to 4¾ percent. the committee anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to  minutes of the meeting of january 31–february 1, 2023 page 13 2 percent over time. in determining the extent of future increases in the target range, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities, as described in its previously announced plans. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lael brainard, lisa d. cook, austan d. goolsbee, patrick in taking this action, the board approved requests to establish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the federal reserve banks of boston, new york, philadelphia, richmond, atlanta, chicago, kansas city, dallas, and san francisco. the vote also encompassed approval by the board of governors of the establishment of a 4.75 percent primary credit rate by the remaining federal reserve banks, effective 5 harker, philip n. jefferson, neel kashkari, lorie k. logan, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 4.65 percent, effective february 2, 2023. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 4.75 percent, effective february 2, 2023. 5 it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, march 21– 22, 2023. the meeting adjourned at 10:20 a.m. on february 1, 2023. notation vote by notation vote completed on january 3, 2023, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on december 13–14, 2022.  joshua gallin secretary on the later of february 2, 2023, or the date such reserve banks inform the secretary of the board of such a request. (secretary’s note: subsequently, the federal reserve banks of cleveland, st. louis, and minneapolis were informed of the board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 4.75 percent, effective february 2, 2023.) 
march 22, 2023 chair powell. good afternoon. before discussing today’s meeting, let me briefly address recent developments in the banking sector. in the past two weeks, serious difficulties at a small number of banks have emerged. history has shown that isolated banking problems, if left unaddressed, can undermine confidence in healthy banks and threaten the ability of the banking system as a whole to play its vital role in supporting the savings and credit needs of households and businesses. that is why, in response to these events, the federal reserve, working with the treasury department and the fdic, took decisive actions to protect the u.s. economy and to strengthen public confidence in our banking system. these actions demonstrate that all depositors’ savings and the banking system are safe. with the support of the treasury, the federal reserve board created the bank term funding program to ensure that banks that hold safe and liquid assets can, if needed, borrow reserves against those assets at par. this program, along with our long-standing discount window, is effectively meeting the unusual funding needs that some banks have faced and makes clear that ample liquidity in the system is available. our banking system is sound and resilient, with strong capital and liquidity. we will continue to closely monitor conditions in the banking system and are prepared to use all of our tools as needed to keep it safe and sound. in addition, we are committed to learning the lessons from this episode and to work to prevent episodes—events like this from happening again. turning to the broader economy and monetary policy: inflation remains too high, and the labor market continues to be very tight. my colleagues and i understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. price stability is the responsibility of the federal reserve. without price  stability, the economy does not work for anyone. in particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of long—of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. the u.s. economy slowed significantly last year, with real gdp rising at a below-trend pace of 0.9 percent. consumer spending appears to have picked up this quarter, although some of that strength may reflect the effects of swings in the weather across the turn of the year. in contrast, activity in the housing sector remains weak, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. committee participants generally expect subdued growth to continue. as shown in our summary of economic projections, the median projection for real gdp growth stands at just 0.4 percent this year and 1.2 percent next year, well below the median estimate of the longer-run normal growth rate. and nearly all participants see the risks to gdp growth as weighted to the downside. yet the labor market remains extremely tight. job gains have picked up in recent months, with employment rising by an average of 351,000 jobs per month over the last three months. the unemployment rate remained low in february at 3.6 percent. the labor force participation rate has edged up in recent months, and wage growth has shown some signs of easing. however, with job vacancies still very high, labor demand substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. fomc participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing upward pressures on wages and prices. the median unemployment rate projection in the sep rises to 4.5 percent at the end of this year and 4.6 percent at the end of next year.  inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. over the 12 months ending in january, total pce prices rose 5.4 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories. core pce—excluding those, core pce prices rose 4.7 percent. in february, the 12-month change in the cpi came in at 6 percent, and the change in the core cpi was 5.5 percent. inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year, but the strength of these recent readings indicates that inflation pressures continue to run high. the median projection in the sep for total pce inflation is 3.3 percent for this year, 2.5 percent next year, and 2.1 percent in 2025. the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go and is likely to be bumpy. despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. at today’s meeting, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, bringing the target range to 4¾ to 5 percent. and we are continuing the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. since our previous fomc meeting, economic indicators have generally come in stronger than expected, demonstrating greater momentum in economic activity and inflation. we believe,  however, that events in the banking system over the past two weeks are likely to result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which would in turn affect economic outcomes. it is too soon to determine the extent of these effects and therefore too soon to tell how monetary policy should respond. as a result, we no longer state that we anticipate that ongoing rate increases will be appropriate to quell inflation; instead, we now anticipate that some additional policy firming may be appropriate. we will closely monitor incoming data and carefully assess the actual and expected effects of tighter credit conditions on economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, and our policy decisions will reflect that assessment. in our sep, each fomc participant wrote down an appropriate path for the federal funds rate based on what that participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. if the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 5.1 percent at the end of this year, 4.3 percent at the end of 2024, and 3.1 percent at the end of 2025. these are little changed from our december projections, reflecting offsetting factors. these projections are not a committee decision or plan; if the economy does not evolve as projected, the path for policy will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. we will continue to make our meeting— decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the vincoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. we remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening in labor market conditions. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run.  to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. colby. colby smith. thank you. colby smith with the financial times. how confident is the committee that the recent stress that we’ve seen, and you’ve alluded to, is contained at this point and that deposit flight among midsize lenders in particular has ceased? chair powell. thanks. so i, i guess our view is that the banking system is sound and it’s resilient—it’s got strong capital [and] liquidity. we took powerful actions with [the] treasury and the fdic, which demonstrate that all depositors’ savings are safe and that the banking system is safe. deposit flows in the banking system have stabilized over the last week. and the last thing i’ll say is that we’ve undertaken—we’re undertaking a thorough internal review that will identify where we can strengthen supervision and regulation. colby smith. okay, just a quick follow-up: i mean, given all the stress and the uncertainty that you’ve also alluded to in the statement, how seriously was a—was a pause considered for this meeting? chair powell. so we considered—we did consider that in the days running up to the meeting, and you see the decision that we made, which i’ll say a couple things about. first, it was supported by a very strong consensus, and i’ll be happy to explain why. and, really, it is that the intermeeting data on inflation and the labor market came in stronger than expected and, really, before the recent events, we were clearly on track to continue with ongoing rate hikes. in fact, as of a couple of weeks ago, it looked like we’d need to raise rates over the course of the  year more than we had expected at the time of the sep in december—at the time of the december meeting. we are committed to restoring price stability, and all of the evidence says that the public has confidence that we will do so—that we’ll bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. it is important that we sustain that confidence with our actions as well as our words. so we also assess, as i mentioned, that the events of the last two weeks are likely to result in some tightening credit conditions for households and businesses and thereby weigh on demand, on the labor market, and on inflation. such a tightening in financial conditions would work in the same direction as rate tightening. in principle, as a matter of fact, you can think of it as being the equivalent of a rate hike or perhaps more than that; of course, it’s not possible to make that assessment today with any precision whatsoever. so our decision was to move ahead with the 25 basis point hike and to change our guidance, as i mentioned, from ongoing hikes to some, some additional hikes maybe—some policy firming may be appropriate. so going forward, as i mentioned, in assessing the need for, for further hikes, we’ll be focused as always on the incoming data and the evolving outlook and, in particular, on our assessment of the actual and expected effects of credit tightening. michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. mr. chairman, can you explain the difference between ongoing rate increases and firming? does firming imply a rate increase per se, or could policy firm without you increasing rates? chair powell. no, i think it’s, it’s meant to refer to our policy rate. really, i would focus on, on the words “may” and “some,” as opposed to “ongoing.” ongoing. so we, we clearly were—what we were doing there was taking onboard the—trying to reflect the uncertainty about what will happen. i mean, it, it’s possible that this will turn out to have very  modest effects—that these events will turn out to be very, very modest effects on the economy, in which case inflation will continue to be strong—in which case, you know, the path will look— might look different. it’s also possible that this potential tightening will contribute significant tightening in credit conditions over time and, in principle, if that—that means that monetary policy may have less work to do. we simply don’t know. so. steve liesman. do you have concerns that the recent—that the hike you did today could further exacerbate the problem in the banks? chair powell. no. i mean, with our monetary policy, we’re, we’re really focused on macroeconomic outcomes. in particular, we’re focused on, on this potential credit tightening and what can that produce in the way of tighter credit conditions. i think when we think about the situation with the banks, we’re focused on our—on our financial stability tools, in particular our lending facilities, the debt—sorry, the discount window, and also the new facility. michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. nick timiraos, the wall street journal. chair powell, in your testimony two weeks ago, you had indicated you thought the terminal rate would be higher. obviously, that was before the stress in the banking sector. and i realize there’s a lot of uncertainty, but can you—can you explain at all to what extent your forecasts or those of your colleagues or those of the board staff incorporated today a material tightening of credit availability because of the stress in the banking sector, or are you waiting to see it in the data before you incorporate that potential tightening into your forecasts? chair powell. so, you know, we have just come from an fomc meeting and, you know, the people who write the minutes will be very carefully counting, but i’ll tell you what i heard. what i heard was significant number of people saying that they anticipated there would  be some, some tightening of credit conditions and that would really have the same effects as, as our policies do, and that therefore they were including that in their assessment and that if that did turn out not to be the case, in principle you would need more rate hikes. so some people did reflect that in their fomc—in their sep forecasts. i think there may also just have been— remember, this is 12 days ago. you know, we’re trying to assess something that just is so recent and it’s people—you know, it’s very difficult, there’s so much uncertainty. so december was a good place to start, and we wound up with—we wound up with very similar outcomes for december. and, you know, in a way, the early—the data in the first part—the first five weeks of the intermeeting period pointed to stronger inflation and stronger labor markets. so that pointed to higher rates. and then this, this latter part kind of—the possibility of credit conditions tightening really, really offset that, effectively. nick timiraos. to follow up: have you considered at all whether your primary tool, the funds rate, is going to be enough to sustain the kind of tighter financial conditions that you believe will be necessary without doing significant damage to the banking sector? have you, for example, considered changing reserve requirements, selling assets out of the system open market account, as a way to better achieve tighter financial conditions that don’t accelerate deposit erosion, for example, from banks? chair powell. you know, we know that we have other, other tools in effect, but no, we think our monetary policy tool works, and we think, you know, many, many banks—our rate hikes were well telegraphed to the market, and many banks have managed to handle them. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi. victoria guida with politico. i wanted to ask—you, along with the fdic and the treasury—the fed board decided to invoke the systemic risk exception to  allow uninsured depositors to be protected at these two banks. i was just wondering if you could speak to why that decision was made. was it purely a confidence issue, or was there a concern that there would be some sort of economic contagion or financial contagion from the failure of these banks? chair powell. the issue was really not about those specific banks, but about the risk of a contagion to, to other banks and to the financial markets more broadly. that was the issue. victoria guida. okay, and then can you also—just to follow up, can you speak to the role that you will be playing in the fed’s internal investigation on its supervision and regulation? chair powell. so vice chair barr is, is of course leading that review. and he’s responsible for it in his capacity as vice chair for supervision. we—i realized, you know, right away that, that there was going to be a need for review. i mean, the question we’re all asking ourselves over that first weekend was, how did this happen? and so what we did was, early monday morning, we sat down and said, “let’s do this.” and he, he was obviously going to lead it in his capacity. so i don’t—my role was to announce it, and i get briefed on it, but i’m not involved in, in the work of it. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. hi, chair powell. howard schneider from reuters. so i want to go back to your february press conference. you mentioned the word “disinflation,” i believe, 9 or 10 times, a process that you felt was—i forget the word you used—but gratefully under way, or something like that. is disinflation still occurring in the u.s. today?  chair powell. yes. i mean, what actually happened, howard, was i got the question 12 times, so it’s—maybe it’s a feature, not a bug. but, so, but yeah, absolutely the same—the story is intact, so it’s really three parts, right? goods inflation has been coming down now for six months; it’s proceeding more slowly than we would have liked, but it’s certainly proceeding. housing services is, is really a matter of time passing. we continue to see the new leases being signed at much lower levels of inflation. so that’s 44 percent of the—of the core pce index, where you’ve got a story that’s ongoing. where we didn’t have in february, and we still don’t have now, is a sign of progress in the nonhousing services sector. and that is, you know, that’s just something that will have to come through softening demand and perhaps some softening in labor market conditions. we don’t see that yet. and that’s, that’s of course 56 percent of the index. so the story is pretty much the same. i will say that the inflation data that we got, to your point, really pointed to stronger inflation. howard schneider. if i could follow up on that, i was curious why you don’t see more coming from the credit crunch, because it seems to me that’s something that you’d actually welcome to a degree and expect. and are you not seeing more coming from that because you don’t know, or because you just don’t want to have another round of wishful thinking? chair powell. so it’s really just a question of not knowing at this point. there’s a great deal of literature on the connection between tighter credit conditions, economic activity, hiring, and inflation. very large body of literature. the question is, how significant will this credit tightening be and how sustainable it will be? that’s, that’s the issue. and we don’t really see it yet, so, so people are making estimates, you know, people are publishing estimates, but it’s very kind of rule-of-thumb guesswork almost at this point. but we think it’s, it’s potentially  quite real and that argues for, you know, being alert as we go forward. as we think about further rate hikes for us, we’ll be paying attention to the actual and expected effects from that. michelle smith. jeanna. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. jeanna smialek from the new york times. thank you for taking our questions. i wonder if you could talk a little bit—i know that you’ve got your internal review coming, but i wonder if you could talk a little bit about what you think happened with oversight at silicon valley bank and whether this suggests that something about regulation and supervision needs to actually change going forward. and i wonder, you know, how can the american people have confidence that there aren’t other weaknesses out there in the banking system, given that this one got missed, as you noted? chair powell. so let me say what, what i think happened, and then i’ll come to the questions around supervision. so, at a basic level, silicon valley bank management failed badly—they grew the bank very quickly, they exposed the bank to significant liquidity risk and interest rate risk, didn’t hedge that risk. we now know that supervisors saw these risks and, and intervened. we know that the public saw all this. we know that svb experienced an unprecedentedly rapid and massive bank run. so this is a—this is a very large group of connected depositors—concentrated group of connected depositors in a very, very fast run, faster than historical record would suggest. so as for us—so for our part, we’re doing a review of supervision and regulation. my only interest is that we identify what went wrong here. how did this happen is the question. what went wrong? try to find that. we will find that. and then make an assessment of what are the right policies to put in place so that it doesn’t happen again, and then implement those policies. it would be inappropriate for me at this stage to offer my views on what the answers might be. you know, i simply can’t do that. vice chair barr is  leading this, and i think he’s testifying next week. so—but that will be up to him. so that’s really where it is. you know, the, the review is going to be thorough and transparent. it is clear—really to your last question—it’s clear that we do need to strengthen supervision and regulation. and i, i assume that there will be recommendations coming out of the report, and i, i plan on supporting them and supporting their implementation. jeanna smialek. and the final point—you know, can we feel confident that these weaknesses don’t exist elsewhere, given that they got missed at this bank? chair powell. these are not weaknesses that are—that are at all broadly through the banking system. this was—this was a bank that was an outlier in terms of both its percentage of, of uninsured deposits and in terms of its holdings of duration risk. and again, supervisors did get in there, and, and they were, as you know, obviously, you know they were— they were on this issue, but nonetheless, this, this still happened. and so that’s really the nature of the interview—sorry, of the review—is to discover that. michelle smith. let’s go to michael mckee. michael mckee. michael mckee from bloomberg radio and television. you’ve been very consistent in saying that the fed would be raising interest rates and then holding them there for quite some time. following today’s decision, the markets have now priced in one more increase in may, and then every meeting the rest of this year they’re pricing in rate cuts. are they getting this totally wrong from the fed, or is there something different about the way you’re looking at it, given that you’re now thinking that moves might be appropriate as opposed to ongoing? chair powell. so we published an sep today, as you will have seen, and it shows that basically participants expect relatively slow growth, a gradual rebalancing of supply and  demand in the labor market, with inflation moving down gradually. in that most likely case, if that happens, participants don’t see rate cuts this year. they just don’t. i would just say: as always, the path of the economy is uncertain, and policy is going to reflect what actually happens rather than what we write down in the sep. but that’s not our baseline expectation. michael mckee. well, if i could follow up and ask, as you look forward into the rest of the year here, are you saying that what you see and the 5.1 percent basically consensus is based on being—it will be sufficiently restrictive? or is it leavened by the idea of you don’t know what's going to happen? in other words, what should people think about in terms of how the fed thinks about how far it is from the terminal? chair powell. it’s going to depend. remember, we’re looking—for purposes of our monetary policy tool, we’re looking at what’s happening among the banks and asking, is there going to be some tightening in credit conditions? and then we’re thinking about that as effectively doing the same thing that rate hikes do. so, in a way, that substitutes for rate hikes. so, the key is, we have to have—policy has got to be tight enough to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. it doesn’t all have to come from rate hikes: it can come from, you know, from tighter credit conditions. so we’re looking at, and we, we—it’s highly uncertain how long the situation will be sustained or how significant any of those effects would be, so we’re just going to have to watch. in the meantime, you know—obviously, at the end of the day, we will do enough to bring inflation down to 2 percent. no one should doubt that. michelle smith. let’s go to rachel siegel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. rachel siegel from the washington post. thank you for taking our questions. i know we’ve talked a bit about how silicon valley bank was unique to a certain sector of the economy, but there’s also growing concern that there are  financial stability risks from the commercial real estate market and loans that will begin to roll over later this year and next, and that smaller regional banks also disproportionately hold those loans. is there a risk that could mimic the kind of—what we saw with svb to banks that disproportionately are focused in commercial real estate? chair powell. so, you know, we’re well aware of the concentrations people have in commercial real estate. i really don’t think it’s comparable to this. the, the banking system is, is strong, it is sound, it is resilient, it’s well capitalized, and i really don’t see that as at all analogous to this. rachel siegel. and one other question: would you be open to an independent investigation, separate from the fed’s probe? chair powell. i welcome—it’s 100 percent certainty that there will be independent investigations and outside investigations and all that. so we welcome—when a bank fails, there are investigations. and, of course, we welcome that. michelle smith. edward. edward lawrence. thank you, mr. chairman. edward lawrence from fox business. inflation has been rather sticky, so do you need help from the fiscal side to get inflation down faster? chair powell. we don’t assume that. we don’t give advice to the fiscal authorities, and we assume that—we take fiscal policy as, as it comes to our front door, stick it in our model along with a million other things. we have responsibility for price stability. the federal reserve has responsibility for that. and nothing’s going to change that. so—and we will get inflation down to 2 percent in time.  edward lawrence. and if i can follow on that, but they’re working—the spending that’s happened is working against what you are doing, right? so it’s prolonging inflation. chair powell. you have to look at, at the impulse from spending because spending was, of course, tremendously high during the pandemic, and then, as the pandemic programs rolled off, spending actually came down, so the—this sort of fiscal impulse is actually not what’s driving inflation right now. it was—it was at the beginning perhaps part of what was driving inflation, but that’s not really the story now. michelle smith. let’s go to neil irwin. neil irwin. hi, chair powell. neil irwin with axios. two questions about aspects of the government’s response on silicon valley bank two weekends ago. first, why is this new bank funding facility done under emergency 13(3) authority, as opposed to expansion of the discount window, changing the terms of the discount window that’s been around a long time? and, second, can you discuss the fed’s role in the—in the fdic guarantee of uninsured depositors and why there’s $143 billion on your balance sheets last week, supporting that deposit guarantee? chair powell. sure. so 13(3) seemed like the right—we have a little more flexibility under section 13(3). we’ve done quite a lot under the discount window as well. we needed to do a special facility that was designed a certain way, so we did it under 13(3). really no magic to that. it’s only available in unusual and exigent circumstances, and it has to be— meet certain requirements, but it seemed to be the right place. so with the fdic, we’re just, we’re lending to the, in effect, we’re—we’re lending to the bridge bank. so that’s where the  funds came from, and it’s—it’s a loan that’s 100 percent guaranteed by the fdic, so there’s no risk in it for us. michelle smith. okay, chris rugaber. chris rugaber. thank you. chris rugaber at associated press. the seb—sep suggests one more rate hike, as does the change in the language in the statement and which suggests that you’re perhaps nearing the end of a cycle of rate hikes. do you feel, though, that if inflation remains high, you’ll be able to resume additional hikes as needed, or have you somewhat tied your hands here with these signals about rate hikes coming to an end? thank you. chair powell. no, absolutely not. no, we, if we need to raise hike—raise rates higher, we will. i think for now though we, we—as i’ve mentioned, we see the likelihood of, of credit tightening. we know that can have, you know, an effect on the macroeconomy, on demand, on labor market, on inflation, and we’re—we’re going to be watching to see what that is. and we’ll also be watching what’s happening with inflation and in the labor market. so we’ll be watching all those things, and of course we will—we will eventually get to [a] tight enough policy to bring inflation down to 2 percent. we’ll find ourselves at that place. michelle smith. kyle. kyle campbell. hi, chair powell—thanks for taking the question. kyle campbell with american banker. i have a couple questions about the balance sheet. first of all, i’m curious at what point the financial supports that the fed is extending through the discount window and through its enhanced lending facility might be at odds with the objective of reducing the balance sheet. and i’m also curious what your thoughts are on the—not just the availability  of reserves but the distribution of them throughout the banking system and at what point you might be concerned about it being scarce for certain banks. chair powell. so—people think of qe and qt in different ways, so let me be clear about how i’m thinking about these recent developments. so the recent liquidity provision that has increased the size of our balance sheet but the intent and the effects of it are very different from what we—from when we expand our balance sheet through purchases of longer-term securities. large-scale purchases of long-term securities are, are really meant to alter the stance of policy by pushing down—pushing up the price and down the rates, longer-term rates, which supports demand through channels we understand fairly well. the balance sheet expansion is really temporary lending to banks to meet those special liquidity demands created by the recent tensions; it’s not intended to directly alter the stance of monetary policy. we do believe that it’s working. it’s having its intended effect of bolstering confidence in the banking system and thereby forestalling what might otherwise have been an abrupt and outsized tightening in financial conditions. so that’s working. in terms of the distribution of reserves, we, we don’t see ourselves as, as running into reserve shortages. we, we think that our program of allowing our balance sheet to, to run off predictably, predicatbly and passively is working. and of course we’re, we’re always prepared to, to change that if that changes. but we don’t see any evidence that that’s changed. michelle smith. catarina. catarina saraiva. hi, chair. catarina saraiva with bloomberg news. the minutes of the january–february meeting, the last meeting, indicate that you discussed the possibility of runs on nonbank financial institutions and the impact of large unrealized losses on bank portfolios. can you talk a little bit more about that discussion—kind of what was talked  about in light of that, and then why didn’t the fed, you know, do anything about that at that point to ultimately prevent, you know, what happened this month? chair powell. i mean, to be honest, i don’t—i don’t recall the specifics of that. it’s been quite an interesting seven weeks. but, but i will tell you, though, that we have—there have been presentations about, about interest rate risk. i mean, it’s been in all the newspapers. it’s not a surprise that there are institutions that have—that have had unhedged long positions in long- duration securities that have lost value as, as longer-term rates have gone up due to our rate increases. so that’s, that’s not a surprise. i, i think, as you know, as is now in the public record, the supervisory team was apparently engaged, very much engaged with the bank repeatedly, and was escalating but, you know, nonetheless, what happened happened. and so that’s really the purpose of—one way to think about the review that vice chair barr is conducting is to try to understand how that happened and try to understand how we can do better and what policies we need to change. i mean, one thing is the speed of the—i’ll come back to that, the speed of the run, it’s very different from what we’ve seen in the past, and it does kind of suggest that there’s a need for possible, you know, regulatory and supervisory changes just because supervision and regulation need to keep up with what’s, what’s happening in the world. catarina saraiva. can you confirm whether or not the board knew about these escalations by the examiners in san francisco? chair powell. i will have to come back to you on that. yeah, i don’t know. michelle smith. simon. simon rabinovitch. hi. simon rabinovitch with the economist. thank you very much. chair powell, you stated twice today that all depositors’ savings in the banking system are safe. are you saying that de facto deposit insurance covers all savings? shouldn’t congress  have a say in that? and, just by way of example, if a bank with less than $1 billion in assets failed, are you promising to bail out all of its depositors? thanks. chair powell. well, i’m not saying anything more than i’m saying. so—but what i’m saying is you’ve seen that we have the tools to protect depositors when there’s a threat of serious harm to the economy or to—or to the financial system, and we’re prepared to use those tools. and i think depositors should assume that their—that their deposits are safe. michelle smith. let’s go to greg robb. greg robb. thank you, chair powell. greg robb from marketwatch. i was wondering if you could give us a little bit more color. you gave just a little bit of color. you said during the first week of the silicon valley weekend—you said the question you guys asked was “how did this happen?” when you saw silicon valley bank. so i was wondering if you could go to the credit suisse merger. i mean, wasn’t that the big gorilla in the room? aren’t— didn’t you breathe a sigh of relief when that merger happened? thanks. chair powell. sure. so, you know, we—that was really the swiss government that we of course were, were following it over the course of the weekend, and we were engaged with their authorities in the way that you would expect, all the ways that you would expect. it seems to have been a positive outcome in the sense that the transaction was agreed to, and it has been— the markets have accepted it, and it seems to have gone well, and i think there was a concern that it might not go well. so coming into the middle of this week, yes, i would say that that is going well so far. michelle smith. nicole. nicole goodkind. hi. thank you, chair powell. nicole goodkind with cnn business. in the summary of economic projections, the fomc sees the unemployment rate  increasing to 4.5 percent this year. i’m wondering how you anticipate preventing this from snowballing while using the admittedly blunt tools at your disposal. chair powell. so that’s just—that’s an estimate of what will happen as demand slows and as conditions soften in the labor market and it’s just—it’s a highly uncertain estimate. and, i mean, i was really—we have to bring inflation down to 2 percent. the costs of bringing it down—there are real costs to bringing it down to 2 percent, but the costs of failing are much higher. and if you read your history, as i’m sure you have, you can see that if the central bank doesn’t get inflation back in place, get inflation—make sure that inflation expectations remain anchored, you can have a long series of years where inflation is high and volatile, and it’s hard to invest capital, it’s hard for an economy to perform well. and we’re looking to avoid that and, you know, to get back to where we need to be—back to where we were for a quarter century, and get there as quickly as we can. nicole goodkind. but i guess the question is, historically, it’s hard to— historically, it’s been hard to contain unemployment and i, i—the question is, do you worry about some sort of snowball effect, and how do you factor that into your projections and your thoughts? chair powell. well, it depends on whether you—so recessions tend to be nonlinear, and so they’re very hard to model. you know, the models all work in a kind of linear way—if you have more of this, you get more of that. but when a recession happens, the reactions tend to be nonlinear and that’s what—so we don’t know whether that’ll happen this time. we don’t know—if so, we don’t know how significant it will be, and so, you know, we’re very focused on getting inflation down because we know in the longer run that that is the thing that will most benefit the people we serve. that’s how we can have a long—you know, we’ve had very strong  labor markets through these long expansions that we’ve had. four of the five longest, or three of the four longest expansions in u.s. history have been really since the high-inflation period. and the reason was inflation wasn’t forcing the central bank to come in and stop an incipient or, or, you know, an expansion. you can have very, very long expansions without high inflation, and we had several of those, and they’re very good for people. you see late in an expansion—you see low unemployment, you see the benefits of wages going to people at the lower end of the wage spectrum. it’s just a place that we should try to get back to. michelle smith. jean. jean yung. hi, chair powell. jean young with market news. i just wanted to ask, with all the events of the past two weeks, do you still see a possibility of a soft landing for the u.s. economy? chair powell. you know it’s, it’s too early to say, really, whether these events have had much of an effect. it’s hard for me to see how they would have helped the possibility—but i guess i would just say, it’s too early to say whether there really have been changes in that. you know, the question will be how long this period is sustained. the longer it’s sustained, then the greater will be the likely declines in—or tightening in credit standards, credit availability, so we’ll just have to see. i do still think, though, that there’s a—there’s a pathway to that. i think that pathway still exists and, you know, we’re certainly trying to find it. michelle smith. nancy. nancy marshall-genzer. hi, chair powell. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. just wondering: how many financial institutions have been issued matters requiring attention or matters requiring immediate attention citations at this point?  chair powell. how many? i don’t know. but those are serious—those are serious regulatory, in particular immediate attention, and that’s—and i guess there were six of them. so. nancy marshall-genzer. and, and getting to the seriousness of it, how are you going to ensure that banks comply with these citations, take them seriously—how will you enforce them? chair powell. that is a great question and is right in the heart of what the review will be doing under vice chair barr’s leadership. so that’s, i think that’s where—that’s what you think about. what can we do to make sure that—but, again, that’s not for me to answer today. nancy marshall-genzer. do you have specific thoughts on that? chair powell. well i, i—see, if i did, i wouldn’t share them because i, i really, you know, this review is going on, and, you know, i want nothing other than us to find out what happened and why, figure out what we can do to do better, and then implement those changes. that’s all i want. it’s—for me to be giving you my half-formed, or partially informed, thoughts, it, you know, just isn’t appropriate. there’s a real serious review going on with, with people from all over the federal reserve system who are not connected to this, you know, to this work, not connected to this bank, and under, again, vice chair barr’s leadership, and i’m confident that it will produce a satisfactory result. michelle smith. okay, we’ll go to jennifer for the last question. jennifer schonberger. thank you, chair powell. jennifer schonberger with yahoo finance. curious—how do you view financial conditions right now? if credit becomes expensive enough, choking off growth, as you said you’re watching for, would that situation warrant a rate cut? what situation would warrant a rate cut? and have the bank failures  prompted any discussion around changing the implementation of the balance sheet runoff? thank you. chair powell. so we haven’t really talked about changing the balance sheet implementation—that’s not something we’ve discussed yet. as i mentioned, we’re always willing to change that if we conclude that it’s appropriate, but we’re really not seeing any signs there. sorry, then the question before that was, just give me a— jennifer schonberger. curious how you view financial conditions now and, if credit were to tighten enough, if that would prompt a rate cut. chair powell. so financial conditions seem to have tightened—and probably by more than the traditional indexes say, because traditional indexes are focused a lot on [interest] rates and [prices of] equities, and they don’t necessarily capture lending conditions. so we think that, though. so there are other measures which, if they’re focused on, you know—bank lending conditions and things like that—they show some more tightening. the question for us, though, is, how significant will that be and how, you know—what will be the extent of it and what will be the duration of it? and then—and then, you know, once you have—once you know that, there’s a fair amount of research about how that, with broad uncertainty bands—how that works its way into the economy [and] over what period of time. and so, you know, we’ll be looking to see the first part of that—like how serious is this, and does it look like it’s going to be sustained, and if it is, you know, it could easily have a significant macroeconomic effect, and we would factor that into our policy decisions. i mentioned with rate cuts, rate cuts are not in our base case, and, you know, so that’s all i have to say. thank you very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 3 page 2 federal open market committee  matthew j. eichner,5 director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board fernando m. martin, assistant vice president, federal reserve bank of st. louis ozge akinci emekli, economic research advisor, federal reserve bank of new york thomas mertens, vice president, federal reserve bank of san francisco jon faust, senior special adviser to the chair, division of board members, board ann e. misback, secretary, office of the secretary, board andrew figura, associate director, division of research and statistics, board giovanni nicolò, senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board glenn follette, associate director, division of research and statistics, board michael g. palumbo, senior associate director, division of research and statistics, board michael s. gibson, director, division of supervision and regulation, board marcel a. priebsch, principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board christine graham,5 special adviser to the board, division of board members, board linda robertson, assistant to the board, division of board members, board joseph w. gruber, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of kansas city achilles sangster ii, senior information manager, division of monetary affairs, board valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board krista schwarz, principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board jane e. ihrig, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board nitish ranjan sinha, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board michael t. kiley, deputy director, division of financial stability, board yannick timmer, senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board don h. kim, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board clara vega, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board spencer krane, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of chicago annette vissing-jørgensen, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board andreas lehnert, director, division of financial stability, board jeffrey d. walker,5 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board paul lengermann, assistant director, division of research and statistics, board kurt f. lewis, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board laura lipscomb, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board david lópez-salido, senior associate director, division of monetary affairs, board francesca loria, senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board byron lutz, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board min wei, senior associate director, division of monetary affairs, board paul r. wood, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board rebecca zarutskie, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board recent developments in the banking sector before turning to other agenda items, the chair asked the vice chair for supervision to provide an update on recent developments in the banking sector. the vice chair for supervision described the developments, including those at silicon valley bank, signature bank, and minutes of the meeting of march 21–22, 2023 page 3  credit suisse. he also described actions taken by the federal reserve and other regulatory agencies in response. he noted that the u.s. banking system is sound and resilient. he also noted that he will be leading a review of the supervision and regulation of silicon valley bank, and that the federal reserve system will apply what is learned from the review to strengthen its supervisory and regulatory practices as appropriate. developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a review of u.s. financial market developments over the intermeeting period. early in the period, firmer-than-expected data and policy communications pushed interest rates higher and equity prices lower. developments in the banking sector later in the period were met with sharp reductions in treasury yields, particularly at shorter tenors. treasury market liquidity was poor and implied volatility was high, but the market remained functional amid substantial trading activity. higher treasury market volatility contributed to wider spreads for household and business borrowing. financial conditions tightened considerably over the intermeeting period as a whole. market contacts observed that the recent developments in the banking system will likely result in a pullback in bank lending, which would not be reflected in most common financial conditions indexes. following the banking-sector developments, equity prices for large u.s. banks underperformed the broad market; equity prices for u.s. regional banks generally underperformed by relatively more. regarding the outlook for inflation in the united states, market-based measures of inflation compensation over shorter horizons rose over the period, although compensation retraced a good portion of its increase later in the period as markets reacted to the developments in the banking sector. forward inflation compensation measures continued to indicate that longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored. measures of inflation expectations from the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants moved higher at shorter horizons and were little changed at longer horizons. regarding the outlook for monetary policy, marketbased measures of policy expectations suggested that the federal funds rate would reach a peak in may 2023 and that the target range would then move lower. however, the medians of respondents’ modal expectations of the federal funds rate from the desk surveys did not show any declines in the target range through the end of 2023. risk and liquidity premiums embedded in market prices may have driven a good part of the difference between survey and market measures. the median respondent expected the summary of economic projections (sep) projections for the federal funds rate at the end of 2023 and 2024 to shift 25 basis points higher. however, information gathered after the desk surveys closed suggests that those expectations had declined some, to a level comparable with the december sep. survey responses suggested only modest changes in expectations for balance sheet policy. the manager turned next to a discussion of operations and money markets. federal funds volumes fell sharply for a few days late in the period as federal home loan banks (fhlbs) sought to maintain liquidity in order to meet increased demand for advances by member banks. money market rates remained broadly stable, and secured and unsecured money market rates, including the effective fed funds rate, traded well within the target range. use of u.s. dollar liquidity swap lines with foreign central banks had been minimal, indicating that market participants did not face significant difficulties in obtaining dollar funding from private sources. borrowing from the new bank term funding program had been small relative to discount window borrowing, which had increased to record levels. use of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility fell, especially for money market mutual funds (mmfs), as the supply of short-term securities at attractive rates increased. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the march 21– 22 meeting indicated that labor market conditions remained tight in january and february, with robust job gains and the unemployment rate near a historical low. consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—was still elevated in january. real gross domestic product (gdp) appeared to be expanding at a modest pace in the first quarter. although financial market data had shown reactions to developments in the banking sector late in the intermeeting period, there were essentially no economic data available that covered this period. page 4 federal open market committee  total nonfarm payroll employment increased at a faster monthly pace in january and february than in the fourth quarter of last year. the unemployment rate was little changed and stood at 3.6 percent in february. over the past two months, the unemployment rate for african americans was unchanged, on net, and the unemployment rate for hispanics moved up; the unemployment rates for both groups remained above the aggregate measure. the aggregate measures of both the labor force participation rate and the employment-topopulation ratio increased slightly. the private-sector job openings rate in january—as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey—was little changed, on balance, since november and remained high. recent indicators of nominal wage growth had slowed but continued to be elevated. in february, the 3-month change in average hourly earnings for all employees was at an annual rate of 3.6 percent, slower than its 12-month pace of 4.6 percent. over the four quarters of 2022, total labor compensation per hour in the business sector—as measured by the productivity and costs data—increased 4.5 percent, below its pace in the previous year. consumer price inflation remained elevated early in the year. total pce price inflation was 5.4 percent over the 12 months ending in january, and core pce price inflation—which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices—was 4.7 percent. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 4.6 percent in january. in february, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 6.0 percent, and core cpi inflation was 5.5 percent. the cpi, along with data from the producer price index, pointed to some slowing in pce price inflation in february. the latest survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations from the university of michigan surveys of consumers, the survey of professional forecasters, and the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations remained within the range of their values reported in recent months, while near-term measures of inflation expectations from these surveys moved down. real gdp growth seemed to be expanding at a modest pace in the first quarter. gains in consumer spending had picked up in recent months, but growth in business fixed investment was slowing and residential investment was continuing to decline. after contracting over the second half of last year, manufacturing output expanded moderately, on average, over january and february, but near-term indicators—such as national and regional indexes for new orders—pointed to softening factory output in the coming months. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit registered a record high in 2022. the trade deficit had been narrowing since march of last year but resumed widening in december and january. real goods imports rose in december and january, led by increases in imports of consumer goods and automotive products. real goods exports also increased, but by less than imports. indicators suggested that foreign economic growth rebounded in the first quarter of 2023 as china reopened rapidly from its covid-19-related shutdowns and europe’s economy proved to be resilient to the energy price shock stemming from russia’s war against ukraine and benefited from a mild winter that reduced energy demand. manufacturing activity in emerging asia showed signs of a turnaround from its pronounced slowdown since mid-2022. the recent developments in the banking sector led to some tightening of financial conditions abroad. oil prices edged down despite china’s rapid reopening and the implementation of the european union’s embargo on russian refined oil products. retail energy inflation continued to slow, contributing to an easing of headline consumer price inflation in many advanced foreign economies (afes). in contrast, core inflation has shown little sign of easing in most foreign economies amid tight labor markets. in response, many foreign central banks continued their monetary policy tightening, although some have either paused or indicated that a pause soon was possible, citing the importance of assessing the cumulative effects of past policy rate increases. staff review of the financial situation over the first several weeks of the intermeeting period, incoming economic data and fomc communications appeared to refocus market participants on upside risks to inflation and policy rates, with the market-implied policy rate path steepening, nominal treasury yields rising, near-term inflation compensation measures increasing, and broad stock market price indexes declining. financing conditions for businesses, households, and municipalities had tightened during this period and were moderately restrictive overall, as borrowing costs increased notably with the expected path of policy rates and treasury yields and as some lenders appeared to tighten nonprice borrowing terms. nonetheless, lending volumes were generally solid. credit quality was strong minutes of the meeting of march 21–22, 2023 page 5  overall, although it had worsened a bit for some borrowers. expectations for future credit quality continued to deteriorate in some markets. pricing in financial markets changed notably in the latter part of the intermeeting period, amid developments in the banking sector. treasury yields and policy rate expectations moved down significantly, while broad stock price indexes rose somewhat. the market-implied policy rate path shifted down sizably, with the federal funds rate expected to peak in may before decreasing afterward. further out, ois (overnight index swap) quotes at the end of the intermeeting period indicated that the expected federal funds rate at year-end 2024 was 3.28 percent, about 50 basis points lower than before the closures of silicon valley bank and signature bank but somewhat higher than at the time of the february fomc meeting. treasury yields declined, especially at shorter maturities, reflecting downward revisions in policy rate expectations and the effects of flight to safety. inflation compensation declined, especially at short maturities, likely reflecting, in part, a relatively larger decline in risk premiums on nominal treasury securities relative to treasury inflation-protected securities due to strong safe-haven demands. late in the intermeeting period, u.s. bank stock prices declined notably. regional banks with unusually large reliance on uninsured deposits and holdings of securities with significant unrealized mark-to-market losses experienced larger declines in stock prices. broad equity prices rose somewhat after the closures of silicon valley bank and signature bank, reportedly driven by investors’ reassessment of the outlook for interest rates, and after the announcement that ubs had agreed to buy credit suisse. the vix—the one-month optionimplied volatility on the s&p 500—increased to about 26.5 percent following the closures of silicon valley bank and signature bank, but it subsequently declined to 21 percent—around the 70th percentile of its historical distribution. swaption-implied volatilities of shortterm interest rates increased notably during this period, reflecting increased uncertainty about the interest rate outlook. some of the pricing moves in asset markets may have been amplified by impaired liquidity conditions. despite deteriorating liquidity conditions in treasury, bond, and equity markets, market functioning remained orderly. over the intermeeting period, foreign financial markets were volatile as investors’ focus shifted from resilience in economic activity and stubbornly high core inflation across advanced economies earlier in the period to stresses in the global banking sector more recently. earlier in the period, yields and market-based measures of inflation expectations in the afes increased notably, driven by spillovers from u.s. treasury yields as well as upside surprises in economic and inflation data for afes. later in the period, developments in the banking sector led to large declines in advanced-economy yields, and, on net, afe yields declined slightly. additionally, for the intermeeting period overall, the staff’s dollar index rose moderately, corporate and emerging market economy sovereign credit spreads widened, and foreign equity indexes generally moved lower, with bank equities falling notably. u.s. unsecured funding markets showed some signs of pressure later in the intermeeting period. issuance of commercial paper (cp) and negotiable certificates of deposit (ncds) dropped a touch over the entire period, and the fraction of cp issuance with overnight maturities increased but remained within normal ranges. spreads of term cp and ncds widened some, and spreads for issuers with lower credit ratings rose more, but other unsecured spreads remained within normal ranges. prime mmfs experienced outflows, while government mmfs had inflows. the effective federal funds rate was little changed after the closures of silicon valley bank and signature bank. amid these developments, federal funds volumes initially declined sharply as the fhlbs reduced their activity in the federal funds market in order to meet increased demand for advances by member banks; market volume subsequently rebounded partially. activity in the repurchase agreement market was robust, and trading volume remained within recent ranges. on rrp take-up remained within recent ranges as well. borrowing costs for businesses, households, and municipalities rose notably in the early part of the intermeeting period, mostly in line with increases in the federal funds rate and treasury yields. since the closures of silicon valley bank and signature bank, spreads on corporate bonds, municipal bonds, and leveraged loans rose, with speculative-grade corporate bond spreads registering the largest moves; spreads remained at moderate levels relative to their historical distributions. investment-grade corporate yields and municipal yields were down moderately, whereas speculative-grade corporate yields and leveraged loan yields were up modestly. mortgage rates were unchanged amid an increase in mortgage-backed securities (mbs) spreads. based on data that do not cover the period following the closures of silicon valley bank and signature bank, page 6 federal open market committee  nonprice terms and standards appeared to tighten somewhat in a number of markets. nevertheless, generally solid funding flows suggest that most firms and households had remained broadly able to access funding. data on credit conditions following the developments in the banking sector were limited. after the two bank closures, issuance of municipal bond and leveraged loans was sluggish, and gross issuance of corporate bonds fell to near zero. mortgage loans to households remained available. the credit quality of businesses and households was largely stable over the intermeeting period. however, measures of credit performance showed some signs of weakening. leveraged loan credit quality deteriorated somewhat after the closures of silicon valley bank and signature bank. credit quality for residential mortgages remained unchanged. staff economic outlook for some time, the forecast for the u.s. economy prepared by the staff had featured subdued real gdp growth for this year and some softening in the labor market. given their assessment of the potential economic effects of the recent banking-sector developments, the staff’s projection at the time of the march meeting included a mild recession starting later this year, with a recovery over the subsequent two years. real gdp growth in 2024 was projected to remain below the staff’s estimate of potential output growth, and then gdp growth in 2025 was expected to be above that of potential. resource utilization in both product and labor markets was forecast to be much less tight than in the january projection. the level of real output was projected to move below the staff’s estimate of potential output in early 2024, more than a year sooner than in the previous projection. likewise, the unemployment rate was projected to rise above the staff’s estimate of its natural rate early next year. on a four-quarter change basis, total pce price inflation was forecast to be 2.8 percent this year, with core inflation at 3.5 percent. core goods inflation was projected to move down further this year and then remain subdued; housing services inflation was expected to peak later this year and then move down, while core nonhousing services inflation was forecast to slow gradually as nominal wage growth eased further. reflecting the effects of less projected tightness in product and labor markets, core inflation was forecast to slow sharply next year. with steep declines in consumer energy prices and a substantial moderation in food price inflation expected for this year, total inflation was projected to step down markedly this year and then to track core inflation over the following two years. in 2024 and 2025, both total and core pce price inflation were expected to be near 2 percent. the staff judged that the uncertainty around the baseline projection was much greater than at the time of the previous forecast. in particular, the staff viewed the risks around the baseline projection as determined importantly by banking conditions and the implications for financial conditions. if the effects of the recent developments in the banking sector on macroeconomic conditions were to abate quickly, then the risks around the baseline would be tilted to the upside for both economic activity and inflation. if banking and financial conditions and their effects on macroeconomic conditions were to deteriorate more than assumed in the baseline, then the risks around the baseline would be skewed to the downside for both economic activity and inflation, particularly because historical recessions related to financial market problems tend to be more severe and persistent than average recessions. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2023 through 2025 and over the longer run. the projections were based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. an sep was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that recent indicators pointed to modest growth in spending and production. at the same time, though, participants noted that job gains had picked up in recent months and were running at a robust pace; the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation remained elevated. participants agreed that the u.s. banking system remained sound and resilient. they commented that recent developments in the banking sector were likely to result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses and to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. participants agreed that the extent of these effects was uncertain. against this minutes of the meeting of march 21–22, 2023 page 7  background, participants continued to be highly attentive to inflation risks. in assessing the economic outlook, participants noted that since they met in february, data on inflation, employment, and economic activity generally came in stronger than expected. they also noted, however, that the developments in the banking sector that had occurred late in the intermeeting period affected their views of the economic and policy outlook and the uncertainty surrounding that outlook. based on incoming economic data, participants’ assessments of the effects of cumulative policy firming, and their initial views on the likely economic effect of the recent banking-sector developments, participants generally expected real gdp to grow this year at a pace well below its long-run trend rate. with inflation remaining unacceptably high, participants expected that a period of below-trend growth in real gdp would be needed to bring aggregate demand into better balance with aggregate supply and thereby reduce inflationary pressures. many participants remarked that the incoming data before the onset of the bankingsector stresses had led them to see the appropriate path for the federal funds rate as somewhat higher than their assessment at the time of the december meeting. after incorporating the banking-sector developments, participants indicated that their policy rate projections were now about unchanged from december. participants agreed that the actions taken so far by the federal reserve in coordination with other government agencies, as well as actions taken by foreign authorities to address banking and financial stresses outside the u.s., had helped calm conditions in the banking sector. even with the actions, participants recognized that there was significant uncertainty as to how those conditions would evolve. participants assessed that the developments so far would likely lead to some weakening of credit conditions, as some banks were likely to tighten lending standards amid rising funding costs and increased concerns about liquidity. participants noted that it was too early to assess with confidence the magnitude of the effect of a credit tightening on economic activity and inflation, and that it was important to continue to closely monitor developments and update assessments of the actual and expected effects of credit tightening. several participants noted that regional and community banks, a small number of which had come under significant stress, were important in small business and middle-market lending and were providing critical and unique financial services to many communities and industries. in their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that incoming data on real consumer expenditures showed a pickup in spending in january and february. they attributed the pickup to strong job gains, rising real disposable income, and households continuing to run down excess savings accumulated during the pandemic. they also noted that an atypically warm start to this year, along with challenges in seasonally adjusting data, likely contributed to the pickup in the reported data. a few participants observed that credit card delinquencies, particularly for lower-income households, had risen in the face of elevated inflation and higher nominal interest rates. participants noted that recent developments in the banking sector and the associated rise in uncertainty would likely weigh on consumer sentiment and that increased caution on the part of consumers could restrain spending. a couple of participants observed that highfrequency measures of consumer sentiment had not yet shown a significant change following the recent developments in the banking sector, although they also acknowledged that the situation was fluid. regarding the business sector, participants observed that growth in business fixed investment was being restrained by tighter financial conditions that reflected cumulative policy firming to date. participants expected the likely tightening of credit conditions due to the recent developments in the banking sector to further weigh on investment spending. in addition, the banking-sector developments could damp business confidence and increase firms’ caution, reducing their willingness to hire new workers. however, a few participants mentioned that their nonbank business contacts reported that the banking-sector developments so far had not resulted in significant changes in their hiring and capital spending plans or sales expectations, though their contacts also acknowledged increased uncertainties around their outlooks. participants agreed that the labor market remained very tight. job gains had picked up to a robust pace in january and february, and the unemployment rate remained low. participants noted some signs of improvement in the imbalances between demand and supply in the labor market, including further declines in the quits rate as well as an increase in the overall labor force participation rate and the return of the prime-age participation rate to prepandemic levels. furthermore, participants observed that wage growth appeared to be slowing gradually amid this apparent easing in labor demand and increase in labor supply. however, participants assessed that labor demand continued to substantially exceed labor supply, and several participants pointed out that wage growth page 8 federal open market committee  was still well above the rates that would be consistent over the longer run with the 2 percent inflation objective, given current estimates of trend productivity growth. participants expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, supply and demand conditions in the labor market will come into better balance over time, easing upward pressures on wages and prices. with inflation still well above the committee’s longerrun goal of 2 percent, participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high. participants commented that recent inflation data indicated slower-than-expected progress on disinflation. in particular, they noted that revisions to the price data had indicated less disinflation at the end of last year than had been previously reported and that inflation was still quite elevated. participants noted that, on a 12-month basis, core goods price inflation declined as supply chains continued to improve, but the pace of the decline had slowed, highlighting the still uncertain nature of the disinflationary process. participants expected that housing services inflation would likely begin to slow in coming months, reflecting continued smaller increases, or potentially declines, in rents on new leases. regarding prices for core services excluding housing, participants agreed that there was little evidence pointing to disinflation in this component. participants generally judged that some more easing in labor market tightness and slowing in nominal wage growth would be necessary for sustained disinflation. additionally, participants observed that indicators of short-term inflation expectations from surveys of households and businesses had come down further, while longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored. participants also discussed the potential effect on inflation of the developments in the banking sector. they noted that a tightening of credit conditions was likely to weigh on aggregate demand, which in turn could help reduce inflationary pressures. however, participants observed that the size of such an effect was highly uncertain. participants generally observed that the recent developments in the banking sector had further increased the already-high level of uncertainty associated with their outlooks for economic activity, the labor market, and inflation. participants saw risks to economic activity as weighted to the downside. as a source of downside risk to activity, they noted the possibility that banks would reduce the supply of credit by more than expected, which could restrain economic activity significantly. participants mentioned potential intensification of russia’s war against ukraine as an additional source of downside risk to the economic outlook. participants generally saw risks to inflation as weighted to the upside, though they also recognized some downside risks to inflation. as a source of upside risk to inflation, participants cited the possibility of more-persistent-thananticipated price pressures, due to, for example, surprisingly resilient labor demand. as a source of downside risk to inflation, participants noted that if banks reduce the supply of credit by more than expected, the likely restraint on economic activity and hiring could put additional downward pressure on inflation. in their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants concurred that inflation remained well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent and that the recent data on inflation provided few signs that inflation pressures were abating at a pace sufficient to return inflation to 2 percent over time. participants also noted that recent developments in the banking sector would likely result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses and weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, though the extent of these effects was highly uncertain. against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 4¾ to 5 percent. all participants also agreed that it was appropriate to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in its previously announced plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. several participants noted that, in their policy deliberations, they considered whether it would be appropriate to hold the target range steady at this meeting. they noted that doing so would allow more time to assess the financial and economic effects of recent banking-sector developments and of the cumulative tightening of monetary policy. however, these participants also observed that the actions taken by the federal reserve in coordination with other government agencies helped calm conditions in the banking sector and lessen the near-term risks to economic activity and inflation. consequently, these participants judged it appropriate to increase the target range 25 basis points because of elevated inflation, the strength of the recent economic data, and their commitment to bring inflation down to the committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal. some participants noted that given persistently high inflation and the strength of the recent economic data, they would have considered a 50 basis point increase in the target range to have been appropriate at this meeting in the absence of the recent developments in the banking sector. however, due to the potential for banking-sector developments to tighten financial conditions and to minutes of the meeting of march 21–22, 2023 page 9  weigh on economic activity and inflation, they judged it prudent to increase the target range by a smaller increment at this meeting. these participants noted that doing so would also allow the committee time to better assess the effects of banking-sector developments on credit conditions and the economy as the committee moved toward a sufficiently restrictive stance of monetary policy. incoming information regarding changes in credit conditions and credit flows as well as broader changes in financial conditions and to assess the implications for economic activity, labor markets, and inflation. several participants emphasized the need to retain flexibility and optionality in determining the appropriate stance of monetary policy given the highly uncertain economic outlook. participants observed that the actions taken by the federal reserve in coordination with other government agencies in the days preceding the meeting had served to calm conditions in the banking sector. participants noted that the most significant issues appeared to have been limited to a small number of banks with poor riskmanagement practices and that the banking system remained sound and resilient. participants emphasized that the federal reserve should use its liquidity and lender-of-last-resort tools, as well as its microprudential and macroprudential regulatory and supervisory tools, to address stress in the banking sector and to mitigate future financial stability risks. participants agreed that recent banking developments would factor into the committee’s monetary policy decisions to the extent that these developments affect the outlook for employment and inflation and the risks surrounding the outlook. participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective. participants emphasized a number of risk-management considerations related to the conduct of monetary policy. some participants observed that downside risks to growth and upside risks to unemployment had increased because of the risk that banking-sector developments could lead to further tightening of credit conditions and weigh on economic activity. some participants also noted that, with inflation still well above the committee’s longer-run goal and the recent economic data remaining strong, upside risks to the inflation outlook remained a key factor shaping the policy outlook, and that maintaining a restrictive policy stance until inflation is clearly on a downward path toward 2 percent would be appropriate from a risk-management perspective. several participants noted the importance of longer-term inflation expectations remaining anchored and remarked that the longer inflation remained elevated, the greater the risk of inflation expectations becoming unanchored. participants generally agreed on the importance of closely monitoring incoming information and its implications for the economic outlook, and that they were prepared to adjust their views on the appropriate stance of monetary policy in response to the incoming data and emerging risks to the economic outlook. in discussing the policy outlook, participants observed that inflation remained much too high and that the labor market remained tight; as a result, they anticipated that some additional policy firming may be appropriate to attain a sufficiently restrictive policy stance to return inflation to 2 percent over time. many participants noted that the likely effects of recent banking-sector developments on economic activity and inflation had led them to lower their assessments of the federal funds rate target range that would be sufficiently restrictive compared with assessments based solely on the recent economic data. in determining the extent of future increases in the target range, participants judged that it would be appropriate to take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in light of the highly uncertain economic outlook, participants underscored the importance of closely monitoring incoming information and assessing the implications for future monetary policy decisions. participants noted that it would be particularly important to review committee policy actions in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators pointed to modest growth in spending and production. they also concurred that job gains had picked up in recent months and were running at a robust pace, that the unemployment rate had remained low, and that inflation remains elevated. members concurred that the u.s. banking system is sound and resilient. they also agreed that recent developments were likely to result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses and to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. members agreed that the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, page 10 federal open market committee  members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4¾ to 5 percent. members agreed that they would closely monitor incoming information and assess the implications for monetary policy. given recent developments, members anticipated that some additional policy firming may be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. members concurred that, in determining the extent of future increases in the target range, they would take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, members agreed that they would continue reducing the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mbs, as described in its previously announced plans. all members affirmed that they remained strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the system open market account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective march 23, 2023, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 4¾ to 5 percent. • conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. • conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 4.8 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day. the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators point to modest growth in spending and production. job gains have picked up in recent months and are running at a robust pace; the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated. the u.s. banking system is sound and resilient. recent developments are likely to result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses and to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. the extent of these effects is uncertain. the committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 4¾ to 5 percent. the committee will closely monitor incoming information and assess the implications for monetary policy. the committee anticipates that some additional policy firming may be appropriate in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. in determining minutes of the meeting of march 21–22, 2023 page 11  the extent of future increases in the target range, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 4.9 percent, effective march 23, 2023. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 5 percent, effective march 23, 2023. 6 it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, may 2–3, 2023. the meeting adjourned at 10:15 a.m. on march 22, 2023. notation vote by notation vote completed on february 21, 2023, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on january 31–february 1, 2023.  joshua gallin secretary voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lisa d. cook, austan d. goolsbee, patrick harker, philip n. jefferson, neel kashkari, lorie k. logan, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. in taking this action, the board approved requests to establish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the federal reserve banks of boston, new york, philadelphia, richmond, atlanta, kansas city, dallas, and san francisco. the vote also encompassed approval by the board of governors of the establishment of a 5 percent primary credit rate by the remaining federal reserve banks, effective on the later of 6 march 23, 2023, or the date such reserve banks inform the secretary of the board of such a request. (secretary’s note: subsequently, the federal reserve banks of cleveland, chicago, st. louis, and minneapolis were informed of the board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 5 percent, effective march 23, 2023.) 
 3, 2023 chair powell. good afternoon. before discussing today’s meeting, let me comment briefly on recent developments in the banking sector. conditions in that sector have broadly improved since early march, and the u.s banking system is sound and resilient. we will continue to monitor conditions in the sector. we are committed to learning the right lessons from this episode and will work to prevent events like these from happening again. as a first step in that process, last week we released vice chair for supervision barr’s review of the federal reserve’s supervision and regulation of silicon valley bank. the review’s findings underscore the need to address our rules and supervisory practices to make for a stronger and more resilient banking system, and i am confident that we will do so. from the perspective of monetary policy, our focus remains squarely on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. price stability is the responsibility of the federal reserve. without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. in particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. today, the fomc raised its policy interest rate by ¼ percentage point. since early last year, we have raised interest rates by a total of 5 percentage points in order to attain a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to 2 percent over time. we are also continuing to reduce our securities holdings. looking ahead, we will take a data-dependent approach in determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate. i will  have more to say about today’s monetary policy actions after briefly reviewing economic developments. the u.s. economy slowed significantly last year, with real gdp rising at a below-trend pace of 0.9 percent. the pace of economic growth in the first quarter of this year continued to be modest, at 1.1 percent, despite a pickup in consumer spending. activity in the housing sector remains weak, largely reflecting higher mortgage, mortgage rates. higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. the labor market remains very tight. over the first three months of the year, job gains averaged 345,000 jobs per month. the unemployment rate remained very low in march, at 3.5 percent. even so, there are some signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming back into better balance. the labor force participation rate has moved up in recent months, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. nominal wage growth has sown— shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. but overall, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. over the 12 months ending in march, total pce prices rose 4.2 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 4.6 percent. inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. nonetheless, inflation pressures continue to run high, and the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by, by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware  that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation pose—poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. at today’s meeting, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, bringing the target range to 5 to 5¼ percent. and we’re continuing to [carry out] the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. with today’s action, we have raised interest rates by 5 percentage points in a little more than a year. we are seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing and investment. it will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. in addition, the economy is likely to face further headwinds from tighter credit conditions. credit conditions had already been tightening over the past year or so in response to our policy actions and a softer economic outlook. but the strains that emerged in the banking sector in early march appear to be resulting in even tighter credit conditions for households and businesses. in turn, these tighter credit conditions are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. the extent of these effects remains uncertain. in light of these uncertain headwinds, along with the monetary policy restraint we have put in place, our future policy actions will depend on how events unfold. in determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. we, we will make that determination meeting by meeting, based on the totality of  incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation. and we are prepared to do more if greater monetary policy restraint is warranted. we remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keep longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. thanks. jeanna. jeanna smialek. hi. jeanna smialek, new york times. thanks for taking our questions. i wonder if you could tell us whether we should read the statement today as a suggestion that the committee is prepared to pause interest rate increases in june. and i also wonder if the fed staff has in any way revised their forecast for a mild recession from the march minutes and, if so, what a recession like what they’re envisioning would look and feel like when it comes to, for example, the unemployment rate. chair powell. so, taking your question—of course, today our decision was to raise the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. a, a decision on a pause was not made today. you will have noticed that in the—in the statement from march, we had a sentence that said the committee anticipates that some additional policy firming may be appropriate. that sentence is, is not in, in the statement anymore. we took that out, and instead we’re saying that, in  determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account certain factors. so we—that’s a— that’s a meaningful change that we’re no longer saying that we anticipate. and so we’ll be driven by incoming data meeting by meeting. and, you know, we’ll approach that question at the june meeting. so the—the staff’s forecast is—so let me say—start by saying that that’s not my own most likely case, which is really that, that the economy will continue to grow at, at a modest rate this year. and i think that’s—so different people on the committee have different forecasts. that’s, that’s my own assessment of the most likely path. [the] staff produces its own forecast, and it’s independent of the forecasts of, of the participants, which include the governors and the reserve bank presidents, of course. and we think this is a healthy thing— that the, the staff is writing down what they really think. they’re not especially influenced by what the governors think, and vice versa. the governors are not taking what the staff says and just writing that down. so it’s actually good that the, the staff and individual participants can have different perspectives. so, broadly, the forecast was for a mild recession, and by that i would characterize as one in which the rise in unemployment is smaller than is—has been typical in modern-era recessions. i wouldn’t want to characterize the staff’s forecast for this meeting. we’ll, we’ll leave that to the minutes—but broadly, broadly similar to that. michelle smith. rachel. rachel siegel. thank you, chair powell. rachel siegel from the washington post. thanks for taking our questions. i’m wondering if you can talk about the account of possible effects of a debt-limit standoff. you’ve said repeatedly that the ceiling must be raised, but do you see any economics effects of even getting close to a default? and what type of situation would that look like?  chair powell. so i wouldn’t want to speculate specifically, but i will say this: these are fiscal policy matters, for starters, and they’re, they’re for congress and the administration—for the elected parts of the government to deal with. and they’re really consigned to them. from our standpoint, i would just say this: it’s essential that the debt ceiling be raised in a timely way, so that the u.s. government can pay all of its bills when they’re due. a failure to do that would be unprecedented. we’d be in uncharted territory, and the—and the consequences to the u.s. economy would be highly uncertain and could, could be quite a[d]verse. so i’ll just leave it there. we, we don’t give advice to either side. we just would point out that it—that it’s very important that this be done. and the, the other point i’ll make about that, though, is that no one should assume that the fed can protect the economy from the potential, you know, short- and long-term effects of a failure to pay our bills on time. we, we— it’s, it would be so uncertain that it’s just as important that, that this—we never get to a place where we’re actually talking about or even having a situation where the u.s. government’s not paying its bills. rachel siegel. and just a follow-up. was discussion around the uncertainty of a possible standoff—did that affect today’s monetary policy decision at all? chair powell. i wouldn’t say that it did. it was—of course, it’s something that came up. we talk a lot about risks to the—to the outlook, and that will—that come up. a number of people did raise that as a risk to the outlook. i wouldn’t say that it was important in today’s monetary policy decision. michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. mr. chairman, can you—oh, thank you. steve liesman, cnbc. can you tell us what the federal reserve board did in the wake of that february presentation  where you were informed that silicon valley bank and other banks were experiencing interest rate risks? and can you tell me what supervisory actions you’ve done in the wake of the recent bank failures to make sure that banks are currently appropriately managing interest rate risk? and kind of part 3, but it’s all the same question here—do, do you still think this separation principle that monetary policy and supervision can be handled with different tools? thank you. chair powell. sure. so the february 14 presentation—i didn’t remember it very well. but now, of course, i’ve gone back and looked at it very carefully. i did remember it. and what it was was a general presentation. it was an informational briefing of the whole board— the entire board. i think all members were there. and it was about interest rate risk in the banks and, and lots of data. and there was one page on silicon valley bank, which talked about, you know, the amount of losses they—or mark-to-market losses they had in their portfolio. there was nothing in it about—that i recall, anyway, about, about the risk of a bank run. so it was—i think the takeaway was, they were going away to do a—an assessment, a vertical—sorry, horizontal assessment of, of banks. it wasn’t—it, it wasn’t presented as an urgent or alarming situation. it was presented as a—as an informational, nondecisional kind of a thing. and i thought it was a good presentation and, and, as i said, did remember it. in terms of what we’re doing—of course, i think banks themselves are, are—many, many banks are now, are attending to liquidity and taking opportunity now, really, since, since the events of, of early march, to build liquidity. and you asked about the separation principle. i— you know, like so many things, it, it’s very useful. but, you know, ultimately, it has its limits. i mean, i, i think in this particular case, we have found that the monetary policy tools and the financial stability tools are not in conflict. they’re both—they’re working well together. we’ve used our, our financial stability tools to support banks through our lending facilities. and, at the  same time, we’ve been able to use our monetary policy tools to foster maximum employment and price stability. steve liesman. mr. chairman, i’m sorry. i don’t mean to be argumentative, but the, the staff report said, “svb . . . has significant interest rate risk.” it said, “interest rate risk measurement[s] . . . failed” at svb. and it said, “banks with large unrealized losses face significant safety and soundness risks.” why was that not alarming? chair powell. well, i mean, i didn’t say it wasn’t alarming. it was—they’re pointing out something that they’re working on and that they’re on the case—that, that, you know, that—i’m not sure whether they mentioned—i think they did, actually. they mentioned that they had taken regulatory action matter—or supervisory action in the form of matters requiring attention. so i think that was also in the presentation. i think it was to say: yes, this is a bank, and there are many other banks that are experiencing this—these things, and we’re on the case. michelle smith. let’s go to victoria. victoria guida. hi, chair powell. i wanted to ask—obviously, with the recent bank turmoil, we’ve seen multiple banks buy other banks. and i was just curious whether you think that further consolidation in the banking sector would increase or decrease financial stability and whether you have any concerns about the biggest bank in the u.s. getting even larger. chair powell. so i, you know, we certainly don’t—and i don’t have an agenda to further consolidate banks. there’s been—consolidation has been a factor in the u.s. banking industry really since interstate banking and before that even—it goes back more than 30 years. you—when i was in the government a while back, i think there were 14,000 banks. now there  are 4,000 and change. so that’s, that’s going on. i personally have long felt that having small-, medium-, and large-size banks is a, a great part of our banking system. you know, the community banks serve particular customers very well; regional banks serve very important purposes, and the various kinds of g-sibs do as well. so i think it’s healthy to have a, you know, an arrange—a range of different kinds of banks doing different things. i think that’s a positive thing. is it a financial—so i would just say, in terms of j.p. morgan buying first republic, the fdic really runs the process of closing and selling a closed bank completely. that, that is their role, so i really don’t have a comment on, on that process. as you know, there’s an exception to the deposit cap for a failing bank. so it was legitimate. and i think the fdic, i believe, is bound by law to take the bid that is the least-cost bid. so i would assume that’s what they did. victoria guida. so do you have any concerns about the fact that they’re, they’re getting larger in general? chair powell. so i, i think it’s probably good policy that we, we don’t want the largest banks doing big acquisitions. that is the policy. and—but this is—this is an exception for a failing bank. and i, i think it’s actually a good outcome for the banking system. it also would have—would have been a good—a good outcome for the banking system had one of the regional banks bought, bought this company. and that could have been the outcome. but, ultimately, we have to follow the law in our agencies, and the law is, it goes to the, the least-cost bid. michelle smith. now to colby. colby smith. thank you. colby smith with the financial times. at the march meeting, you mentioned that tightening of credit conditions from the recent bank stress could be  equal to one or more rate increases. so, given developments since then, how has your estimate changed? chair powell. yeah. i think—i think i follow that up by saying, it’s, it’s quite impossible to have a precise estimate of the words to that effect. but, in principle, that’s the idea. you know, when we—we’ve been raising interest rates, and that raises the price of credit, and that, in a sense, restricts credit in the economy, working through the price mechanism. and, you know, when banks raise their credit standards, that can also make credit tighter in a kind of broadly similar way. it isn’t—it isn’t possible to make a kind of clean translation between one and the other, although firms are trying that and, you know, we’re trying it. but, ultimately, we have to be—we have to be honest and humble about our ability to make a precise assessment. so it does complicate the task of achieving, you know, a sufficiently restrictive stance. but i think, conceptually, though, we think that, you know, interest rates—in principle, we won’t have to raise the rates quite as high as we would have had this not happened. the extent of that is so hard to predict because we don’t know how persistent these, these effects will be. we don’t know how large they’ll be and how long they’ll take to be transmitted. but that’s, that’s what we’ll be watching carefully to find out. colby smith. just to quickly follow up—what does it suggest about the scope for the committee to pause rate increases perhaps as early as next month, even if the data remains strong then, if, if it’s having some kind of substitute effect? chair powell. it’s that—this is just something that we have to factor in as we—as we want to find ourselves. so i guess i would say it this way: the assessment of, of the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate is going to be an ongoing one, meeting by meeting, and we’re going to be looking at the factors that i mentioned that—they’re listed in, in  the statement, the obvious factors. that’s, that’s the way we’re going to be thinking about it. and that’s really all we can do. as i say, it does complicate—we, we have, you know, a broad understanding of monetary policy. credit tightening is a different thing. there’s a lot of literature on that. but translating it into, into rate hikes is uncertain, let’s say—it adds even further uncertainty. nonetheless, we’ll be able to see what’s happening with credit conditions— what’s happening with lending. we get—there’s a lot of data on that. and, you know, we’ll, we’ll factor that into our decisionmaking. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. howard schneider with reuters. thank you. so, noting that the statement dropped the reference to “sufficiently” restricted—“restrictive,” i was wondering, given your baseline outlook, whether you feel this current rate of 5 to 5¼ percent is, in fact, sufficiently restrictive. chair powell. that’s going to be an ongoing assessment. we’re going to need data to accumulate on that—not an assessment that we’ve made, as—that, that would mean we think we’ve reached that point. and i just think it’s, it’s not possible to say that with confidence now. but, nonetheless, you, you will know that the summary of economic projections from the march meeting showed that in—at that point in time, that the median participant thought that this was— this was the appropriate level of the—of the ultimate high level of rates. we don’t know that. we’ll revisit that at the june meeting. and that’s—you know, we’re just going to have to— before we really declare that, i think we’re going to have to see data accumulating and, and, you know, make that—as i mentioned, it’s an ongoing assessment. howard schneider. i have a follow-up on credit. could you give us a sense of what the sloos survey indicated? it was already, i think, 40, 45 percent of banks were  tightening credit as of the, the last survey. what did this one show, and how did that weigh into your deliberations? chair powell. so we’re going to release the results of this sloos on may 8, in line with our usual time frame. and i would just say that the sloos is broadly consistent, when you see it, with how we and others have been thinking about the situation and what we’re seeing from other sources. you will have seen the beige book and listened to the various earnings calls that indicate that midsize banks have—some of them had been tightening their lending standards. banking data will show that lending has continued to grow, but the pace has been slowing really since the second half of last year. michelle smith. let’s go to nick. nick timiraos. nick timiraos, wall street journal. chair powell, the argument around the end of last year and the beginning of this year to slow down the pace of increases was to give yourself time to study the effects of those moves. after the bank failures in march, as you’ve discussed, the fed staff projected a recession starting later this year. so my question is why it was necessary to raise interest rates today. or, put, put differently: if the whole point of slowing down the pace was to see the effects of your moves, and now you’ve, for the last two meetings, been seeing the effects of those moves, why did the committee feel it was necessary to keep moving? chair powell. well, we—the reason is that we—again, with our monetary policy we’re try—trying to reach and then—and then stay at a, for an extended period, a level of policy—a policy stance that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. and, you know, that’s what we’re trying to do with our—with our tool. i think slowing down was the right move. i, i think it’s enabled us to see more data, and it will continue to do  so. so i, i—you know, we really—you know, we have to balance. we always have to balance the risk of not doing enough and, and not getting inflation under control against the risk of maybe slowing down economic activity too much. and we thought that this rate hike, along with the meaningful change in, in our policy statement, was the right way to balance that. nick timiraos. and just to follow up, you know, what you said in response to howard’s question—you’ll need data to accumulate to determine if this is a sufficiently restrictive stance. does that data need to accumulate, or could it accumulate over a longer period than a six-week intermeeting cycle? chair powell. yeah. i mean, as i mentioned, i would just say that this assessment will be an ongoing one. you—you know, you can’t—with, with economic data, you, you can’t—you’ve, you’ve seen—take inflation for a minute. look, look back. we’ve seen inflation come down—move back up two or three times since march of 2021. we’ve seen inflation have a few months of coming down and then come right back up. so i think you’re going to want to see that—you know, that a few months of data will, will persuade you that you’ve—that you’ve got this right, kind of thing. and, you know, we, we have the luxury: we’ve raised 500 basis points. i think that policy is tight. i think real rates are probably—that you can calculate them many different ways. but one way is to look at the nominal rate and then subtract a, a reasonable estimate of, of, let’s say, one-year inflation, which might be 3 percent. so you’ve got 2 percent real rates. that’s meaningfully above what most people would—many people, anyway, would, would assess as, you know, the neutral rate. so policy is tight. and you see that in interest— interest-sensitive activities. and you also begin to see it more and more in, in other activities. and if you—if you put the—you put the credit tightening on top of that and the qt that’s, that’s  ongoing, i think, i think you feel like, you know, we’re, we may not be far off—we’re possibly even at—that level. michelle smith. edward. edward lawrence. thank you very much, chair powell. edward lawrence with fox business. so if the federal reserve gets down to the 3 percent inflation, as the projections show, at the end of this year or close to it, would it be okay for you for a prolonged period of 3 percent inflation and hoping for some outside event to move down to 2 percent target? chair powell. look—i think we’re always going to have 2 percent as our, our target. we’re always going to be focusing on getting there. edward lawrence. you would be okay with a prolonged 3 percent? chair powell. you know, it’s—let me just say, that’s not what we’re looking for. we’re looking for inflation going down to 2 percent over time. i mean, we—that’s, that’s not a question that’s in front of us, and it would depend on so many other things. but, ultimately, we’re not looking to get to 3 percent and then drop our tools. we have a, a goal of getting to 2 percent. we think it’s going to take some time. we don’t think it’ll be a smooth process. and, you know, i think we’re going to—we’re going to need to stay at this for a while. edward lawrence. how does the other side of the mandate—the jobs side—once you get to 3 percent, going from 3 to 2, how does the other side of the mandate balance? chair powell. i think they, they—you know, they, they will both matter equally at that point. right now, you have a labor market that’s still extraordinarily tight. you still got 1.6 job openings, even with the lower job openings number, for every unemployed person. we do see some evidence of softening in labor market conditions. but, overall, you’re near a 50-year low in unemployment. wages—you all will have seen that the wage number from late  last week, and it’s—whenever it was. and, you know, it’s, it’s a couple of percentage points above what would be—what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. so we do see some softening; we see new labor supply coming in. these are very positive developments. but the labor market is very, very strong, whereas inflation is, you know, running high—well above our—well above our goal. and right now, we need to be focusing on bringing inflation down. fortunately, we’ve been able to do that so far without unemployment going up. michelle smith. matt. matthew boesler. hi, chair powell. matthew boesler with bloomberg news. so, many analysts noted at the time of the march fomc meeting that at least half of fed officials’ projections did imply or seemed to imply that a recession was in their baseline forecast as well, given the strong first-quarter gdp tracking estimates. and so i’m just wondering if you could kind of elaborate on, you know, why you’re optimistic that a recession can be avoided, given that that’s the fed staff’s forecast—possibly also the broader committee’s forecast as well—and, and also, of course, most private-sector forecasters’. chair powell. yeah. i don’t think—you know, i know what’s printed in the summary of economic projections and all that. i don’t think you can deduce exactly what you said about what participants think, because you don’t know what they were thinking for first- quarter gdp at that point. they could have been thinking about a fairly low number. anyway, in any case, i’ll just say, i, i continue to think that it’s possible that this time is really different. and the reason is, there’s just so much excess demand, really, in the labor market. it’s, it’s interesting, as, you know, we’ve raised rates by 5 percentage points in 14 months, and the unemployment rate is 3½ percent, pretty much where it was—even lower than where it was when we started. so job openings are still very, very high. we see—by surveys and much,  much [other] evidence—that, that conditions are cooling gradually. but it’s—it really is different. you know, it wasn’t supposed to be possible for job openings to decline by as much of the—as they’ve declined without unemployment going up. well, that’s what we’ve seen. so we—there are no promises in this. but it just seems that, to me, that it’s possible that we can continue to have a cooling in the labor market without having the big increases in unemployment that have gone with many, you know, prior episodes. now, that would be against history. i, i fully appreciate that. that would be against the, the pattern. but i do think that it—that this, that the situation in the labor market, with so much excess demand, yet, you know, wages are actually—wages have been moving down. wage increases have been moving down, and that’s a good sign—down to a more sustainable level. so i think that—i think it’s still possible. i—you know, i think, you know, the, the case of, of avoiding a recession is, in my view, more likely than that of having, having a recession. but it’s not—it’s not that the case of having a recession is—i don’t rule that out, either. it’s, it’s possible that we will have what i hope would be a mild recession. matthew boesler. the committee also noted in march that wage growth was still well above levels that would be consistent with 2 percent inflation. do you see that as well? and could you kind of explain, you know, how you come to that judgment? chair powell. sure. so we look at a range of wage, wage measures. and then that’s in nominal. and then—so you assume wages should be equal to productivity increases plus inflation. and so you can—you can look at, you know, the employment compensation index, average hourly earnings, the atlanta wage tracker, compensation per hour—basically, those four and many others. and you can—you can look at, at what the—what they would have to run at over a long period of time for that to be consistent with 2 percent inflation. they can  deviate. you know, corporate margins can go up and down. and there is a feature of long expansions where they do go down—where labor gets a bigger share toward later, later in a recession—sorry, later in an expansion. so, yeah. the, the—you know, and we calculate those, and you have to take the precision with a degree of—a degree of salt. but i would say that what they will show is that, you know, if, if the—if wages are running at 5 percent, 3 percent is closer to where they need to be. wage increases and closer to 3 percent, roughly, is what it would take to get—to be consistent with inflation over a longer period of time. i—by the way, i don’t want to—i do not think that wages are the principal driver of inflation. you’re asking me a very specific question. i think there are many things. i think wages and prices tend to move together. and it’s very hard to say what’s causing what. but, you know, i’ve never said that, you know, that—that wages are really the principal driver, because i don’t think that’s really right. chris rugaber. great. chris rugaber at associated press. well, you mentioned profit margins. those have expanded—did expand sharply during this inflationary period. and while there are some signs that they are starting to decline, many economists note they haven’t fallen as much as might be expected, given that we’re seeing at least some pullback among consumer spending. so, speaking of causes of inflation, do you see expanded profit margins as a driver of higher prices? and if so, would you expect them to narrow soon and, and contribute to reduced inflation in the coming months? chair powell. so higher profits and higher margins are what happens when you have an imbalance between supply and demand: too much demand, not enough supply. and we’ve been in a situation in many parts of the economy where, where supply has been fixed or, or not flexible enough. and so, you know, the way the market clears is through higher prices. so to get, i, i think—as goods pipelines have, have gotten, you know, back to normal so that we  don’t have the long waits and the shortages and that kind of thing—i think you will see inflation come down. and you’ll see—you’ll see corporate margins coming down as a result of return of full competition, where there’s enough supply to meet demand. and then it’s—then it’s, then you’re really back to full competition. that’s—that would be the dynamic i would expect. michelle smith. michael. michael mckee. michael mckee for bloomberg radio and television. can you tell us something about what your policy reaction function is—your policy framework is going forward? when you look at the economy at the next meeting, are you looking at incoming data, which is, by definition, backward looking? are you going to be forecasting what you think is going to happen? are you ruling out the rate cuts that the market has priced in? chair powell. i didn’t catch the last part. rolling? michael mckee. markets have priced in rate cuts by the end of the year. do you rule that out? chair powell. oh, yes. sorry, sorry, sorry. okay, i got it. so, what are we looking at? i mean, we look at a combination of data and, and forecasts. of course, the whole idea is to—is to create a good forecast based on what you see in the data. so we’re always, always looking at both. you know, and it will—of course, it’ll be the obvious things. it’ll be readings on inflation. it’ll be readings on wages, on economic growth, on the labor market, and all of those many things. i think a particular focus for us going—now, over the past six, seven weeks now and going forward is going to be, what’s happening with credit tightening? are small and medium-sized banks tightening credit standards, and, and is that having an effect on, on loans, on lending? and, you know, so we can begin to assess how that fits in with monetary policy. that’ll, that’ll be an important thing. i just—you know, we’ll be looking at everything. it’s—  again, i would just point out, we’ve raised rates by 5 percentage points. we are shrinking the balance sheet. and now we have credit conditions tightening—not just in the normal way, but perhaps a little bit more, due to what’s happened. and we have to factor all of that in and, and make our assessment of—you know, of whether our policy stance is sufficiently restrictive. and we have to do that in a world where policy works with long and variable lags. so this is challenging. but, you know, we, we will make our best assessment, and that’s what we think. michael mckee. what about the idea of rate cuts? chair powell. yeah. so we on the committee have a—have a view that inflation is going to come down—not so quickly, but it’ll take some time. and in that world, if that forecast is broadly right, it would not be appropriate and—to cut rates, and we won’t cut rates. if you have a different forecast and, you know, markets—or have been, from time to time, pricing in, you know, quite rapid reductions in inflation, you know, we’d, we’d factor that in. but that’s not our forecast. and, of course, the history of the last two years has been very much that inflation moves down. particularly now, if you look at nonhousing services, it really, really hasn’t moved much. and it’s quite stable. and, you know, so we think we’ll have to—demand will have to weaken a little bit, and labor market conditions, conditions may have to soften a bit more to begin to see progress there. and, again, in that world, it wouldn’t be—it wouldn’t be appropriate for us to cut rates. michelle smith. courtenay. courtenay brown. courtenay brown from axios. i’m curious how you view the role of the overnight reverse repo facility in the context of the current banking stress. do you think it’s contributing to the stress by making it more attractive for money market funds to  compete with banks for deposits? and did the committee discuss any changes to the structure of the facility? or do you see that being put on the table in the future? thanks. chair powell. sure. so we looked at that very carefully, as you would imagine. and, you know, the—it’s, it’s really not contributing, we don’t think, now. it hasn’t actually been growing. you know, it moved up—moved down and then moved back up to where it was. what happened in the—when, when there were the big deposit flows, which, by the way, have really stabilized now—what happened was, institutional investors took their uninsured deposits and put them in government money market funds, which bought paper from the federal home loan banks and things like that. over the course of, of maybe the last year, retail investors had been gradual—as they do in every tightening cycle, they’ve been gradually moving their deposits into higher-yielding places such as cds and, and other things, including money market funds. so that’s a gradual process that is quite natural and happens during a, a tightening cycle. what was unusual, really, was the institutional investors moving their uninsured deposits and spreading them around and things like that. but it doesn’t seem to have had any—any effect overall on the overnight repo facility. that is really there to, to help us keep rates where they’re supposed to be, and it’s, it’s serving that purpose very well. michelle smith. sarah. sarah ewall-wice. sarah ewall-wice, cbs news. i want to go back to the debt ceiling for a moment. i know you talked about that in terms of fiscal policy, but can you just speak towards what the impact of a default would mean for americans across the country, the markets, and borrowing? chair powell. yeah. i would just say, it’s —i, i don’t really think we should be— we shouldn’t even be talking about a world in which the u.s. doesn’t pay its bills. it just—it just  shouldn’t be a thing. and, and again, i would just say, we don’t—no one should assume that the fed can do—can really protect the economy and the financial system and our reputation globally from, from the damage that such, such an event might inflict. michelle smith. scott. scott horsley. thanks, mr. chairman. scott horsley for npr. in his report last week, vice chair barr identified a couple of the factors that he thought contributed to the regulatory—or the supervisory lapses at silicon valley bank: a policy change in 2019 to exempt all but the biggest banks from strict scrutiny and also what he called a sort of cultural shift towards less aggressive oversight. you were here in 2019. do you share that view, and what would it take to get the, the stronger oversight that you and he said in your release would be necessary? chair powell. so i, i didn’t—i didn’t take part in creating the report or doing the work, but i do—i have read it, of course. and i find it persuasive. i mean, i would say it this way: a, a very large—a large bank, not a very large bank—a large bank failed quite suddenly and unexpectedly in a way that threatened to spread contagion into the financial system. i think the only thing that, that i’m really focused on is to understand what went wrong, what happened, and, and identify what we need to do to address that. some of that is—may, it may just have been technology evolving. you know, we have to keep up with all that. but some of it may be our policies, and—supervisory and regulatory, whatever. what our job is now is, identify those things and implement them. and that’s kind of the only thing i care about is—and i think—i feel like i am accountable for doing everything i can to make sure that that happens. michelle smith. let’s go to evan.  evan ryser. thank you. evan ryser with mni market news. chair powell, are we in the early stage or nearing the end stage of the banking turmoil among regional banks? and, secondly, do you still have a bias to tighten rates? is that what the statement is saying? chair powell. so i guess i would—i guess i would say it this way. there were three large banks, really, from the very beginning that were at the heart of the stress that we— that we saw in early march, the severe period of stress. those have now all been resolved, and all the depositors have been protected. i think that the resolution and sale of, of first republic kind of draws a line under that period of—is an important step toward drawing a line under that period of, of severe stress. okay. i also think we are very focused on what’s happening with credit availability, particularly, you know, with what you saw in the—in the beige book, and you will see in the sloos, is, is small and medium—medium-sized, small and medium-sized banks who are feeling that they need to tighten credit standards—build liquidity. what’s going to be the macroeconomic effect of that? more broadly, we, we will continue to very carefully monitor what’s going on in the banking system, and we’ll factor that assessment into our decisions in an important way, going forward. michelle smith. okay. greg. greg robb. thank you, fed chairman. greg robb from marketwatch. i just wondered if you’ve done any reflection on, on your own actions during this crisis and leading up to it over the last—since you’ve been fed chairman, i think i’ve heard you say a couple of times that you deferred to the vice chair for supervision. do you think that was the right way to go about this? and, yeah, comments on that. thank you. chair powell. sure. so let me say, first of all, i’ve been chair of the board for five-plus years now, and i fully recognize that we made mistakes. i think we’ve learned some  new things as well, and we need to do better. and, as i mentioned, i thought the report was unflinching and appropriately so. i welcome it. and i agree with and will support those recommendations. and i do feel that i’m personally accountable to do what i can to foster measures that will address the problems. so, on, on the vice chair for supervision, you know, the place to start is, is the statutory role, which is quite unusual. the vice chair, it says, shall deploy policy recommendations—“develop policy recommendations for the board regarding supervision and regulation of depository institution . . . companies . . . , and shall oversee the supervision and regulation of such firms.” so this is congress establishing a four-year term for someone else on the board—not, not the chair—as vice chair for supervision who really gets to set the agenda for supervision and regulation for the board of governors. congress wanted that person to be—to have political accountability for developing that agenda. so the way it works—the way it has worked in practice for me is, i’ve had a good working relationship. i give my, my counsel, my input privately, and that’s—i offer that. and i have good conversations, and i try to contribute constructively. i respect the authority that congress has deferred on that person, including working with, with vice chair barr and, and his predecessor. and i think that’s the way it’s supposed to work, and that’s appropriate. i, i believe that’s what the law requires. and, you know—but, but it isn’t—i wouldn’t say it’s a matter of complete deference. it’s more, i have a—i have a role in, in presenting my views and discussing—having an intelligent discussion about what’s going on and why. and, you know, that’s, that’s my input. but, ultimately, that person does get to set the agenda and gets to take things to the board of governors and really, in supervision, has sole authority over supervision. greg robb. just wondered if you have any regrets? or was there anything that, you know—decisions that maybe you regret now in light of what’s happened?  chair powell. i’ve had a few, sure. i mean, you know, who doesn’t look back and think that you could have done things differently? but, honestly, you don’t—you don’t get to do that. again, my focus is on what—control the controllable. as one of my great mentors used to always say, “control the controllable.” what we control now is, make a fair assessment, learn the right lessons, figure out what the fixes are, and implement them. and, and i think that, that vice chair barr’s report is an excellent first step in that, but we’ve got to follow through. megan cassella. hi, there. megan cassella with barron’s. did the possibility of pausing at this meeting come up at all, and how seriously was that considered? i’m curious if you can give us any color as to whether there were any initial concerns about raising rates again or what those discussions entailed. chair powell. so support for the 25 basis point rate increase was very strong across the board. i would say there are a number of people—and, you know, you’ll see this in the minutes. i don’t want to try to do the head count in real time. but people did talk about pausing, but not so much at this meeting, you know, that we’re—i mean, there’s a sense that we’re, we’re—that, you know, we’re much closer to the end of this than to the beginning, that—you know, as i mentioned, if you—if you add up all the tightening that’s going on through various channels, it’s—we, we feel like we—you know, we’re getting close or, or maybe even there. but that, again, that’s going to be an ongoing assessment. and, and we’re going to be looking at those factors that we listed and—to determine whether there’s, there’s more to do. megan cassella. i’m curious, too, how to interpret that and, and the changes to the statement. is the bar higher now to raise rates at the next meeting, or would a strong jobs report or inflation print be enough to push the fed to tighten again?  chair powell. i don’t want to—i couldn’t—i couldn’t really say. i just think we’re—i think we—look, i think we’ve moved a long way fairly quickly. and i think we can afford to look at the data and, and make a careful assessment. michelle smith. and we’ll go to nancy for the last question. nancy marshall-genzer. hi, chair powell. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. you mentioned a few times about the lessons you’ve learned from the banking crisis—that you would learn the right lessons. what are those lessons? chair powell. well, i just would start with something that’s changed, really, which is this—the run on silicon valley bank was out of keeping with the speed of runs through history. and that now needs to be reflected in some—in some way in regulation and in supervision. it—we know—now that we know it’s possible, i think we didn’t—no one thought that was possible. no one—i’m not aware of anybody thinking that this could happen so—quite so quickly. so i think that, you know, that will play through. i, i, you know—it will be up to vice chair barr to really take the lead in designing the ways to address that. but i think—i think that’s one thing. i, i guess i would just say that. then, you know—that we’re going to— obviously, we’re going to revisit [this]. it’s pretty clear we need—to me, anyways—clear that we need to strengthen both supervision and regulations for banks of this size. and i’m, i’m thinking that we’re on the—on track to do that as well. nancy marshall-genzer. can you be any more specific on stress testing or looking at banks that have specific concentrations in certain parts of the economy? chair powell. yeah. that’s—see, that’s, that’s what vice chair barr’s role really is, and he’ll take the lead on that. thank you.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 3 minutes of the meeting of may 2–3, 2023 page 3  annette vissing-jørgensen, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board jeffrey d. walker,3 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board min wei,2 senior associate director, division of monetary affairs, board paul r. wood, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board rebecca zarutskie, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets. asset prices were less volatile and financial market conditions eased somewhat over the intermeeting period as investor sentiment around the banking system stabilized. on net, nominal treasury yields declined, equities appreciated, credit spreads tightened, and the trade-weighted value of the dollar depreciated. measures of implied volatility declined across markets. policy-sensitive rates, however, fluctuated a fair amount over the period, particularly in response to economic data but also because of market perceptions of risk and liquidity conditions. treasury market liquidity improved somewhat over the period but remained challenged. treasury cash and futures markets continued to function in an orderly manner despite the lower-than-normal liquidity. regarding developments late in the intermeeting period, the closure and acquisition of first republic bank were seen as orderly, though investors remained focused on stresses in the banking sector. in addition, the u.s. treasury department announced it may not be able to fully satisfy the federal government’s obligations as early as june 1 if the debt limit is not raised or suspended, but that the actual date this event would occur might come a number of weeks later. yields on treasury bills and coupon securities maturing in the first half of june increased notably amid significant volatility. deposit outflows from small and mid-sized banks largely stopped in late march and april. although equity prices for regional banks fell further over the period, for the vast majority of banks these declines appeared primarily to reflect expectations for lower profitability rather than solvency concerns. market participants remained alert to the possibility of another intensification of banking stress. responses to the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants suggest that investors’ macroeconomic outlooks were little changed from march despite ongoing focus on the implications of the expected tightening of credit. respondents saw upside inflation risks, albeit less than in march. market participants broadly expected a 25 basis point rate increase at the may meeting and saw the resulting rate as the likely peak for the current tightening cycle. survey respondents assigned a much higher probability to the peak federal funds rate being between 5 and 5.25 percent than they did in march. however, respondents still assigned a substantial probability that the peak rate may turn out to be above 5.25 percent. respondents expected the peak rate to be maintained through the january 2024 fomc meeting. regarding the balance sheet and money markets, balance sheet runoff continued to proceed smoothly and overnight secured and unsecured rates continued to trade well within the target range for the federal funds rate. respondents to the desk’s surveys generally expected that overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) balances will remain elevated in the near term before declining later this year. the on rrp facility continued to support effective policy implementation and control over the federal funds rate, providing a strong floor for money market rates. balances at the on rrp facility remained within their recent range, indicating that use of the facility was not an important factor driving outflows of deposits from the banking system. use of the on rrp facility declined at times over the intermeeting period in response to increases in rates on overnight secured money market instruments and on short-term federal home loan bank debt. the committee voted unanimously to renew the reciprocal currency arrangements with the bank of canada and the bank of mexico; these arrangements are associated with the federal reserve’s participation in the north american framework agreement of 1994. in addition, the committee voted unanimously to renew the dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements with the bank of canada, the bank of england, the bank of japan, the european central bank, and the swiss national bank. the votes to renew the federal reserve’s participation in these standing arrangements occur annually at the april or may fomc meeting. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. page 4 federal open market committee  there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the may 2–3 meeting indicated that real gross domestic product (gdp) had expanded at a modest pace in the first quarter. labor market conditions remained tight in march, as job gains were robust and the unemployment rate was low. consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce)—continued to be elevated in march. limited data were available on economic activity during the period after the onset of banking-sector stress in mid-march, although several recent surveys—such as the senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos) in april, the national federation of independent business’s survey in march, and the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations in march—indicated that bank credit conditions were tightening further. the pace of increases in total nonfarm payroll employment slowed in march but was still robust, and the unemployment rate ticked down to 3.5 percent. the unemployment rate for african americans fell to 5.0 percent, and the jobless rate for hispanics dropped to 4.6 percent. the aggregate measures of both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio edged up. the private-sector job openings rate—as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey—moved down markedly during february and march but remained high. recent measures of nominal wage growth continued to ease from their peaks recorded last year but were still elevated. over the 12 months ending in march, average hourly earnings for all employees rose 4.2 percent, well below its peak of 5.9 percent a year earlier. over the year ending in march, the employment cost index (eci) for private-sector workers increased 4.8 percent, down from its peak of 5.5 percent over the year ending in june of last year. consumer price inflation remained elevated in march but continued to slow. total pce price inflation was 4.2 percent over the 12 months ending in march, and core pce price inflation—which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and many consumer food prices—was 4.6 percent; the total inflation measure was down markedly from its level in january, while the core measure was only slightly lower. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 4.7 percent in march. the latest survey-based measures of longerterm inflation expectations from the university of michigan surveys of consumers in april and the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations in march remained within the range of their values reported in recent months; near-term measures of inflation expectations from these surveys moved up but were still below their peaks seen last year. real gdp growth was modest in the first quarter, led by an increase in pce. gains in consumer spending picked up for the quarter as a whole, driven by a surge in january that was followed by a small net decline over february and march. light motor vehicle sales, however, picked up notably in april. growth in business fixed investment slowed further in the first quarter, and new orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft continued to decline in march, pointing to weakness in capital goods shipments in the near term. residential investment declined further in the first quarter but at a slower pace than last year. net exports made a small positive contribution to gdp growth in the first quarter, as exports rebounded more strongly than imports from their fourth-quarter declines. u.s. manufacturing output fell in march, and near-term indicators— such as national and regional indexes for new orders— pointed to more softening in factory output in the coming months. foreign economic activity rebounded in the first quarter, reflecting the reopening of china’s economy from its covid-19-related shutdowns, a pickup in the economies of canada and mexico, and the resilience of europe’s economy to the energy price shock from russia’s war on ukraine; a mild winter also helped reduce energy demand in europe. in contrast, economic growth elsewhere in emerging asia was weak in the first quarter mainly due to a pronounced tech-cycle slowdown. oil prices edged down amid concerns about the global economic outlook. a slowing of retail energy inflation continued to contribute to an easing of headline consumer price inflation in many advanced foreign economies (afes). core inflation showed signs of easing in some foreign economies but remained persistently elevated amid tight labor markets. accordingly, many foreign central banks continued their monetary policy tightening. that said, some central banks paused their policy rate increases or altered their forward guidance amid uncertainty about the global economic outlook minutes of the meeting of may 2–3, 2023 page 5  and the recent banking-sector stress. some also signaled a shift toward a more data-dependent approach in future decisions. staff review of the financial situation market sentiment improved over the intermeeting period, with concerns about a sharp near-term deceleration in economic activity appearing to recede as stress in the banking sector declined. the market-implied path for the federal funds rate in 2023 increased modestly over the period. broad equity price indexes increased, although equity prices of some regional banks were lower, and equity market volatility declined. financing conditions continued to be restrictive, and borrowing costs remained elevated. over the intermeeting period, the market-implied path for the federal funds rate in 2023 rose modestly, partially unwinding the sharp decline observed in early march due to the banking-sector stress. for 2024 and 2025, the implied policy path based on overnight index swaps fluctuated amid mixed economic data releases, and declined slightly on net. yields on nominal treasury securities with maturities greater than one year moved lower, and inflation compensation at mediumand long-term horizons edged down slightly. measures of uncertainty about the path of interest rates declined modestly but remained substantially elevated by historical standards. broad stock price indexes increased moderately, and the vix—the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—decreased notably over the intermeeting period. however, market participants remained attentive to developments at regional banks. equity prices at such banks broadly declined over the intermeeting period in part because of higher funding costs, as well as concerns about profitability and a possible deterioration in the performance of commercial real estate (cre) loans. risk sentiment in foreign financial markets also improved, on net, over the intermeeting period amid reduced investor concerns about the banking sector, leading to moderate increases in broad equity indexes and declines in option-implied measures of equity volatility. that said, equity prices for euro-area banks declined somewhat, on net, and remained significantly lower than their levels before the onset of banking stresses in early march. market expectations of policy rates and sovereign yields were little changed in most afes but rose notably in the u.k., in part because of higher-thanexpected wage and inflation data. the dollar continued its earlier depreciation as differentials between u.s. and afe sovereign yields narrowed and global risk sentiment improved. outflows from funds dedicated to emerging markets slowed to near zero over the intermeeting period, while sovereign credit spreads for emerging market economies were little changed on net. u.s. markets for commercial paper (cp) and negotiable certificates of deposit (ncds) stabilized over the intermeeting period. spreads for lower-rated nonfinancial cp, which spiked following silicon valley bank’s closure, narrowed significantly. outstanding levels of cp and ncds increased modestly over the intermeeting period, while the share of short-maturity unsecured issuance of cp and ncds fell to normal levels, reflecting a net easing of stress associated with regional banks. conditions in overnight bank funding and repurchase agreement markets remained stable over the intermeeting period, and the increase of 25 basis points in the federal reserve’s administered rates following the march fomc meeting fully passed through to overnight money market rates. the effective federal funds rate printed at 4.83 percent every day during the period, while the secured overnight financing rate averaged 4.81 percent—slightly above the offering rate at the on rrp facility. daily take-up in the on rrp facility remained elevated, reflecting continued significant usage by money market mutual funds, ongoing uncertainty around the policy path, and limited supply of alternative investments such as treasury bills. in domestic credit markets, borrowing costs for businesses and households eased modestly in some markets but remained at elevated levels. over the intermeeting period, yields on corporate bonds declined moderately, and yields on agency residential mortgage-backed securities and 30-year conforming residential mortgage rates moved a little lower. however, interest rates on shortterm small business loans continued to rise through march and reached their highest levels since the global financial crisis. credit flows for businesses and households slowed moderately, as high borrowing costs and market volatility amid stress in the banking sector appeared to weigh on financing volumes in some markets. while issuance of nonfinancial corporate bonds and leveraged loans slowed notably in mid-march amid stress in the banking sector, issuance normalized over the intermeeting period as that stress abated later in the month and broader market sentiment rebounded. in april, speculativegrade nonfinancial bond issuance was solid, while investment-grade nonfinancial bond issuance was sub- page 6 federal open market committee  dued, in part due to seasonal factors. growth in commercial and industrial (c&i) loans on banks’ books was weak in the first quarter of 2023 relative to its pace in 2022. in the april sloos, banks reported further tightening of standards for most loan categories over the past three months, following widespread tightening in previous quarters. banks of all sizes expected their lending standards to tighten further for the rest of 2023. the most cited reason for tightening c&i standards and terms was a less favorable or more uncertain economic outlook. mid-sized banks—those that have total consolidated assets in the range of $50 billion to $250 billion—tightened c&i standards more than other banks and additionally reported that a deterioration in their current or expected liquidity position was an important reason for their tightening. such banks account for a bit over one-fourth of c&i lending. banks of all sizes expected to tighten c&i standards further over the remainder of the year, with small and mid-sized banks more widely reporting this expectation. although cre loan growth on banks’ balance sheets remained robust in the first quarter, the april sloos indicated that loan standards across all cre loan categories tightened further in the first quarter. the reported tightening in standards over the first quarter was particularly widespread for mid-sized banks. banks also reported that they expected to tighten cre standards further over the remainder of the year, with mid-sized banks very broadly reporting this expectation. meanwhile, commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) issuance was very slow in february and march, amid higher spreads and volatility as well as tighter lending standards. credit remained broadly available in the residential mortgage market for high-credit-score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria, but credit availability for households with lower credit scores remained tight. in the april sloos, the net percentages of banks reporting tighter standards for all consumer loan categories during the first quarter were elevated relative to their historical range, and respondents expected that standards would continue to tighten over the remainder of 2023. even so, consumer loans grew at a robust pace in the first quarter, with a continued strong expansion in revolving credit balances. overall, the credit quality of most businesses and households remained solid but deteriorated somewhat for businesses with lower credit ratings and for households with lower credit scores. the credit quality of c&i and cre loans on banks’ balance sheets remained sound as of the end of the fourth quarter of last year. however, in the april sloos, banks frequently cited concerns about a deterioration in the quality of their loan portfolios as a reason for expecting to tighten standards over the remainder of the year. the staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system. the staff judged that the banking system was sound and resilient despite concerns about profitability at some banks. the staff judged that asset valuation pressures remained moderate. in particular, the staff noted that the equity risk premium and corporate bond spreads declined over the past few months but remained near historical medians. valuations in both residential and commercial property markets remained elevated. rising borrowing costs had contributed to a moderation of price pressures in housing markets, and year-over-year house price increases had decelerated. the staff noted that the cre sector remained vulnerable to large price declines. this possibility seemed particularly salient for office and downtown retail properties given the shift toward telework in many industries. the staff also noted analysis that found that while losses to cre debt holders could be moderate in aggregate, some banks and the cmbs market could experience stress should prices of these properties decline significantly. the staff assessed that vulnerabilities associated with household leverage remained at moderate levels. for nonfinancial businesses, debt relative to nominal gdp declined some but continued to be near a historically high level. the ability of nonfinancial firms to service their debt kept pace with rising debt loads and interest rates. in terms of financial-sector leverage, going into the period of recent bank stress, banks of all sizes appeared strong, with substantial loss-absorbing capacity as measured by regulatory capital ratios well above levels that prevailed before the great recession. however, the ratio of tangible common equity to total tangible assets at banks—excluding global systemically important banks—had fallen sharply in recent quarters, partly because of a substantial drop in the value of securities held in their portfolios. the majority of the banking system had been able to effectively manage this interest rate risk exposure. however, the failure of three banks resulting from poor interest rate risk and liquidity risk management had put stress on some additional banks. for the nonbank sector, leverage at large hedge funds remained somewhat elevated in the third quarter of minutes of the meeting of may 2–3, 2023 page 7  2022, and more recent data from the senior credit officer opinion survey on dealer financing terms suggested this fact had not changed. with regard to vulnerabilities associated with funding risks, the staff assessed that although funding strains had been notable for some banks, such strains remained low for the banking system as a whole, especially in light of official interventions by the federal reserve, the federal deposit insurance corporation, and the u.s. department of treasury to support bank depositors. outflows of funds from bank deposits in mid-march, which were concentrated at a limited number of banks, had slowed. staff economic outlook the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the may fomc meeting continued to assume that the effects of the expected further tightening in bank credit conditions, amid already tight financial conditions, would lead to a mild recession starting later this year, followed by a moderately paced recovery. real gdp was projected to decelerate over the next two quarters before declining modestly in both the fourth quarter of this year and the first quarter of next year. real gdp growth over 2024 and 2025 was projected to be below the staff’s estimate of potential output growth. the unemployment rate was forecast to increase this year, to peak next year, and then to start declining gradually in 2025. resource utilization in both product and labor markets was forecast to loosen, with the level of real output moving below the staff’s estimate of potential output in early 2024 and the unemployment rate rising above the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at that time. the staff’s core inflation forecast was revised up a little relative to the previous projection. recent data for core pce goods prices and the eci measure of wage growth—the latter of which importantly influences the staff’s projection of core nonhousing services inflation—came in above expectations, and the staff judged that supply–demand imbalances in both goods markets and labor markets were easing a bit more slowly than anticipated. on a four-quarter change basis, total pce price inflation was projected to be 3.1 percent this year, with core inflation at 3.8 percent. core goods inflation was projected to move down further this year and then remain subdued, housing services inflation was expected to have about peaked in the first quarter and to move down over the rest of the year, and core nonhousing services inflation was forecast to slow gradually as nominal wage growth eased further. reflecting the projected effects of less tightness in resource utilization, core inflation was forecast to slow through next year but remain moderately above 2 percent. with expected declines in consumer energy prices and a substantial moderation in food price inflation, total inflation was projected to run below core inflation this year and next. in 2025, both total and core pce price inflation were expected to be at about 2 percent. the staff continued to judge that uncertainty around the baseline projection was considerable and still viewed risks as being determined importantly by the implications for macroeconomic conditions of developments in the banking sector. if banking-sector stress were to abate more quickly or have less of an effect on macroeconomic conditions than assumed in the baseline, then the risks would be tilted to the upside for economic activity and inflation, a scenario that the staff viewed as only a little less likely than the baseline. if banking and financial conditions and their effects on macroeconomic conditions were to deteriorate more than assumed in the baseline, then the risks around the baseline would be skewed to the downside for economic activity and inflation. on balance, the staff saw the risks around the baseline inflation forecast as tilted to the upside, as an upside economic scenario with higher inflation appeared more likely than a downside scenario with lower inflation, and because inflation could continue to be more persistent than expected and inflation expectations could become unanchored after a long period of elevated inflation. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that economic activity had expanded at a modest pace in the first quarter. nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation remained elevated. participants agreed that the u.s. banking system was sound and resilient. they commented that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. however, participants agreed that the extent of these effects remained uncertain. against this background, participants concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. in assessing the economic outlook, participants noted that the growth rate of real gdp in the first quarter of this year was modest despite a pickup in consumer spending, as inventory investment—a volatile category—declined substantially. participants generally expected real gdp to grow at a pace below its longer-run page 8 federal open market committee  trend rate in 2023, reflecting the effects of restrictive financial conditions. participants assessed that the cumulative tightening of monetary policy over the past year had contributed significantly to more restrictive financial conditions. they also judged that banking-sector stress would likely weigh further on economic activity, but the extent to which that would be the case remained highly uncertain. with inflation well above the committee’s longer-run 2 percent objective, and core inflation showing only some signs of moderation, participants expected that a period of below-trend growth in real gdp and some softening in labor market conditions would be needed to bring aggregate supply and aggregate demand into better balance and reduce inflationary pressures over time. participants generally noted that the actions taken by the federal reserve and other government agencies in response to developments in the banking sector had been effective in largely reducing stress. they noted that conditions in the banking sector had broadly improved since early march, with the initial deposit outflows experienced by some regional and smaller banks moderating substantially over subsequent weeks. many participants commented that the recent developments in the banking sector had contributed to some tightening of lending standards beyond that which had occurred during previous quarters, especially among small and mid-sized banks. some participants noted that small businesses tend to rely on small and mid-sized banks as primary sources of credit and therefore may disproportionally bear the effects of tighter lending conditions. some participants mentioned that access to credit had not yet appeared to have declined significantly since the recent onset of stress in the banking sector. participants judged that stress in the banking sector would, in coming quarters, likely induce banks to tighten lending standards by more than they would have in response to higher interest rates alone. however, participants generally noted that it was too early to assess with confidence the magnitude and persistence of these effects on economic activity. in their discussion of the household sector, participants noted that consumer spending showed strength in the first quarter, supported by gains in personal disposable income. they also remarked that the quarterly strength was driven mainly by very strong spending growth in january, while real spending fell modestly over february and march. consistent with that slowing, participants anticipated that consumer spending would likely grow at a subdued rate over the remainder of 2023, reflecting in large part the effects of the tightening in financial conditions over the past year. participants remarked that higher interest rates would continue to restrain interest-sensitive expenditures by households, such as those on housing and durable goods. participants also noted that the rise in uncertainty associated with recent developments in the banking sector could weigh on consumer sentiment and spending. however, several participants observed that high-frequency measures of consumer sentiment had not yet shown significant changes following the banking-sector developments. a few participants remarked that there had been some ongoing reduction in consumers’ discretionary expenditures in the face of elevated inflation and higher borrowing rates, especially among lower- and middle-income households; some of those declines were reportedly driven by shifts in purchases toward lower-cost options. regarding the business sector, participants observed that growth in business fixed investment was subdued in the first quarter, reflecting relatively high borrowing costs, weak growth of business-sector output, and businesses’ increasing concerns about the general economic outlook. participants expected the tightening of bank lending standards to weigh further on firms’ capital expenditures. several participants noted that, based on reports from their district contacts, concerns related to banking-sector stress could add more uncertainty to an already soft economic outlook, increasing firms’ caution, especially at smaller and mid-sized firms that rely heavily on bank credit to finance their operations. however, some other participants mentioned that developments in the banking sector appeared to have had only a modest effect so far on credit availability for firms. participants noted that the labor market remained very tight, with robust payroll gains in march and an unemployment rate near historically low levels. nevertheless, they noted some signs that the imbalance of supply and demand in the labor market was easing, with prime-age labor force participation returning to its pre-pandemic level and further reductions in the rates of job openings and quits. in addition, some participants noted that their district contacts reported less difficulty in hiring, lower turnover rates, and some layoffs. participants anticipated that employment growth would likely slow further, reflecting a moderation in aggregate demand coming partly from tighter credit conditions. participants remarked that although nominal wage growth appeared to be slowing gradually, it was still running at a pace that, given current estimates of trend productivity growth, was well above what would be consistent over minutes of the meeting of may 2–3, 2023 page 9  the longer run with the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. participants generally anticipated that under appropriate monetary policy, imbalances in the labor market would gradually diminish, easing pressures on wages and prices. participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high. they commented that data through march indicated that declines in inflation, particularly for measures of core inflation, had been slower than they had expected. participants observed that although core goods inflation had moderated since the middle of last year, it had decelerated less rapidly than expected in recent months, despite reports from several business contacts of supply chain constraints continuing to ease. additionally, participants emphasized that core nonhousing services inflation had shown few signs of slowing in the past few months. some participants remarked that a further easing in labor market conditions would be needed to help bring down inflation in this component. regarding housing services inflation, participants observed that soft readings on rents for leases signed by new tenants were starting to feed into measured inflation. they expected that this process would continue and would help lead to a decline in housing services inflation over this year. in discussing the likely effects on inflation of recent banking-sector developments, several participants remarked that tighter credit conditions may not put much downward pressure on inflation in part because lower credit availability could restrain aggregate supply as well as aggregate demand. several participants noted that longer-term measures of inflation expectations from surveys of households and businesses remained well anchored. participants emphasized that with appropriate firming of monetary policy, well-anchored longer-term inflation expectations would support a return of inflation to the committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal. participants noted that risks associated with the recent banking stress had led them to raise their already high assessment of uncertainty around their economic outlooks. participants judged that risks to the outlook for economic activity were weighted to the downside, although a few noted the risks were two sided. in discussing sources of downside risk to economic activity, participants referenced the possibility that the cumulative tightening of monetary policy could affect economic activity more than expected, and that further strains in the banking sector could prove more substantial than anticipated. some participants also noted concerns that the statutory limit on federal debt might not be raised in a timely manner, threatening significant disruptions to the financial system and tighter financial conditions that weaken the economy. regarding risks to inflation, participants cited the possibility that price pressures could prove more persistent than anticipated because of, for example, stronger-than-expected consumer spending and a tight labor market, especially if the effect of bank stress on economic activity proved modest. however, a few participants cited the possibility that further tightening of credit conditions could slow household spending and reduce business investment and hiring, all of which would support the ongoing rebalancing of supply and demand in product and labor markets and reduce inflation pressures. in their discussion of financial stability, various participants commented on recent developments in the banking sector. these participants noted that the banking system was sound and resilient, that actions taken by the federal reserve in coordination with other government agencies had served to calm conditions in that sector, but that stresses remained. a number of participants noted that the banking sector was well capitalized overall, and that the most significant issues in the banking system appeared to be limited to a small number of banks with poor risk-management practices or substantial exposure to specific vulnerabilities. these vulnerabilities included significant unrealized losses on assets resulting from rising interest rates, heavy reliance on uninsured deposits, or strained profitability amid higher funding costs. some participants additionally noted that, because of weak fundamentals for cre such as high vacancy rates in the office segment, high exposure to such assets was a vulnerability for some banks. participants also commented on the susceptibility of some nonbank financial institutions to runs or instability. these included money market funds, which had recently experienced large cash inflows; hedge funds, which tend to use substantial leverage and may hold concentrated positions in some assets with low or zero margin; thinly capitalized nonbank mortgage servicers; and digital asset entities. many participants mentioned that it is essential that the debt limit be raised in a timely manner to avoid the risk of severely adverse dislocations in the financial system and the broader economy. a few participants noted the importance of orderly functioning of the market for u.s. treasury securities or stressed the importance of the appropriate authorities continuing to address issues related to the resilience of the market. a number of participants emphasized that the federal reserve should maintain readiness to use its liquidity tools, as well as its microprudential and page 10 federal open market committee  macroprudential regulatory and supervisory tools, to mitigate future financial stability risks. in their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants concurred that inflation remained substantially elevated relative to the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. economic activity had expanded at a modest pace in the first quarter. the labor market continued to be tight, with robust job gains in recent months, and the unemployment rate remained low. participants also noted that recent developments in the banking sector would likely result in tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which would weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. however, the extent of these effects remained uncertain. against this backdrop, all participants agreed that it was appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points to 5 percent to 5¼ percent. all participants agreed that it was also appropriate to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in its previously announced plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. in discussing the policy outlook, participants generally agreed that in light of the lagged effects of cumulative tightening in monetary policy and the potential effects on the economy of a further tightening in credit conditions, the extent to which additional increases in the target range may be appropriate after this meeting had become less certain. participants agreed that it would be important to closely monitor incoming information and assess the implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, various participants noted specific factors that should bear on future decisions on policy actions. one such factor was the degree and timing with which cumulative policy tightening restrained economic activity and reduced inflation, with some participants commenting that they saw evidence that the past years’ tightening was beginning to have its intended effect. another factor was the degree to which tighter credit conditions for households and businesses resulting from events in the banking sector would weigh on activity and reduce inflation, which participants agreed was very uncertain. additional factors included the progress toward returning inflation to the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent, and the pace at which labor market conditions softened and economic growth slowed. participants also discussed several risk-management considerations that could bear on future policy decisions. a few assessed that there were upside risks to economic growth. however, almost all participants commented that downside risks to growth and upside risks to unemployment had increased because of the possibility that banking-sector developments could lead to further tightening of credit conditions and weigh on economic activity. almost all participants stated that, with inflation still well above the committee’s longerrun goal and the labor market remaining tight, upside risks to the inflation outlook remained a key factor shaping the policy outlook. a few participants noted that they also saw some downside risks to inflation. taking into account these various considerations, participants discussed their views on the extent to which further policy firming after the current meeting may be appropriate. participants generally expressed uncertainty about how much more policy tightening may be appropriate. many participants focused on the need to retain optionality after this meeting. some participants commented that, based on their expectations that progress in returning inflation to 2 percent could continue to be unacceptably slow, additional policy firming would likely be warranted at future meetings. several participants noted that if the economy evolved along the lines of their current outlooks, then further policy firming after this meeting may not be necessary. in light of the prominent risks to the committee’s objectives with respect to both maximum employment and price stability, participants generally noted the importance of closely monitoring incoming information and its implications for the economic outlook. participants discussed the importance and various aspects of clearly explaining monetary policy actions and strategy. all participants reaffirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective over time and remained highly attentive to inflation risks. a few participants commented that recent monetary policy actions and communications had helped keep inflation expectations well anchored, which they saw as important for the attainment of the committee’s goals. participants emphasized the importance of communicating to the public the data-dependent approach of policymakers, and the vast majority of participants commented that the adjusted language in the postmeeting statement was helpful in that respect. some participants stressed that it was crucial to communicate that the language in the postmeeting statement should not be interpreted as signaling either that decreases in the target range are likely minutes of the meeting of may 2–3, 2023 page 11  this year or that further increases in the target range had been ruled out. committee policy actions in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had expanded at a modest pace in the first quarter. they also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation had remained elevated. members concurred that the u.s. banking system was sound and resilient. they also agreed that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. members agreed that the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 5 to 5¼ percent. members agreed to closely monitor incoming information and assess the implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, members concurred that they will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, members agreed that they will continue reducing the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. all members affirmed that they are strongly committed to returning inflation to their 2 percent objective. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the system open market account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective may 4, 2023, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 5 to 5¼ percent. • conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. • conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 5.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day. • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “economic activity expanded at a modest pace in the first quarter. job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated. the u.s. banking system is sound and resilient. tighter credit conditions for households and page 12 federal open market committee  businesses are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. the extent of these effects remains uncertain. the committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks. information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 5 to 5¼ percent. the committee will closely monitor incoming information and assess the implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent to which additional policy firming may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lisa d. cook, austan d. goolsbee, patrick harker, philip n. jefferson, neel kashkari, lorie k. logan, and christopher j. waller. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of in taking this action, the board approved requests to establish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the federal reserve banks of boston, philadelphia, cleveland, richmond, atlanta, chicago, st. louis, minneapolis, kansas city, dallas, and san francisco. the vote also encompassed approval by the board of governors of the establishment of a 5.25 percent primary credit rate by the remaining federal 4 voting against this action: none. to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 5.15 percent, effective may 4, 2023. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 5.25 percent, effective may 4, 2023. 4 it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, june 13– 14, 2023. the meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m. on may 3, 2023. notation vote by notation vote completed on april 11, 2023, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on march 21–22, 2023.  joshua gallin secretary reserve bank, effective on the later of may 4, 2023, or the date such reserve bank informs the secretary of the board of such a request. (secretary’s note: subsequently, the federal reserve bank of new york was informed of the board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 5.25 percent, effective may 4, 2023.) 
une 14, 2023 chair powell. good afternoon. my colleagues and i remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. we understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. price stability is the responsibility of the federal reserve. without price stability, the economy doesn’t work for anyone. in particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. since early last year, the fomc has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. we have raised our policy interest rate by 5 percentage points, and we’ve continued to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. we’ve covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. in light of how far we’ve come in tightening policy, the uncertain lags with which monetary policy affects the economy, and potential headwinds from credit tightening, today we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. looking ahead, nearly all committee participants view it as likely that some further rate increases will be appropriate this year to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. and i will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. the u.s. economy slowed significantly last year, and recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a modest pace. although growth in consumer spending has picked up this year, activity in the housing sector remains weak, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. committee participants generally expect subdued  growth to continue. in our summary of economic projections, the median projection has real gdp growth at 1.0 percent this year and 1.1 percent next year, well below the median estimate of the longer-run normal growth rate. the labor market remains very tight. over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged a robust 283,000 jobs per month. the unemployment rate moved up but remained low in may at 3.7 percent. there are some signs that supply and demand in the labor market are coming into better balance. the labor force participation rate has moved up in recent months, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. nominal wage growth has shown signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. while the jobs-to-workers gap has declined, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. fomc participants expect supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing upward pressures on inflation. the median unemployment rate projection in the sep rises to 4.1 percent at the end of this year and 4.5 percent at the end of next year. inflation remains well above our longer-run 2 percent goal. over the 12 months ending in april, total pce proces—prices rose 4.4 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 4.7 percent. in may, the 12-month change in the consumer price index came in at 4 percent, and the change in the core, core cpi was 5.3 percent. inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. nonetheless, inflation pressures continue to run high, and the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. the median projection in the sep for total pce inflation is 3.2 percent this year, 2.5 percent next year, and 2.1 percent in 2025. core pce inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, is projected to run higher than total inflation, and the median projection has been revised in the sep up to 3.9 percent this year. despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation  expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and price—and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we’re strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. as i noted earlier, since early last year, we’ve raised our policy rate by 5 percentage points. we have been seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy, especially housing and investment. it will take time, however, for the full effects of monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. the economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. the extent of these effects remains uncertain. in light of how far we’ve come in tightening policy, the uncertain lags with which monetary policy affects the economy, and potential headwinds from credit tightening, the committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 to 5¼ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. as i noted earlier, nearly, nearly all committee participants expect that it will be appropriate to raise interest rates somewhat further by the end of the year. but at this meeting, considering how far and how fast we’ve moved, we judged it prudent to hold the target range steady to allow the committee to assess additional information and its implications for monetary  policy. in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in our sep, participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. if the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 5.6 percent at the end of this year, 4.6 percent at the end of 2024, and 3.4 percent at the end of 2025. for the end of this year, the median projection is ½ percentage point higher than in our march projections. i hasten to add, as always, that these projections are not a committee decision or plan. if the economy does not evolve as projected, the path for policy will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum- employment and price-stability goals. we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks. we remain committed to bringing inflation—bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do at the fed is in service to our public mission.  we will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you. and i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. colby. colby smith. thank you. colby smith with the financial times. i’m curious what gives you and the committee the confidence that waiting will not be counterproductive at a time when the monthly pace of core inflation is still so elevated. interest rate–sensitive sectors like housing, while they’ve felt the drag of the past fed actions, have started to recover in some regions, and financial conditions, you know, most recently were easing. chair powell. so, i guess i would—i guess i would go back to the beginning of this tightening cycle to address that. so as we started our rate hikes early last year, we said there were three issues that would need to be addressed kind of in sequence—that of the speed of tightening, the level to which rates would need to go, and then a period of time over which we’d need to keep policy restrictive. so at the outset, going back 15 months, the key issue was how fast to move rates up, and we moved very quickly by historical standards. then last december, after four consecutive 75 basis point hikes, we moderated to a pace of 50—of a 50 basis point hike and then this year to three 25 basis point hikes at sequential meetings. so it seemed to us to make obvious sense to moderate our rate hikes as we got closer to our destination. so the decision to consider not hiking at every meeting and ultimately to hold rates steady at this meeting, i would just say it’s a continuation of, of that process. the main issue that we’re focused on now is determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time—so that the pace of the increases and the ultimate level of increases are separate variables, given how far it—we have come. it may make sense for rates to move higher but at a more moderate pace.  i want to stress one more thing—and that is that the committee decision made today was only about this meeting. we didn’t make any decision about going forward, including what would happen at the next meeting, including—we did not decide or really discuss anything about going to an every-other-meeting kind of an approach or, or really any other approach. we really were focused on what to do at this meeting. colby smith. so there was no kind of initial debate about the possibility of july— any sense of the initial support at this stage for that move? chair powell. so again, we didn’t—we didn’t make a decision about july. i mean, of course, it, it came up in the—in the meeting from time to time. but really, the focus was, was on what to do today. i would say about, about july two things: (1) [the] decision hasn’t been made, (2) i do expect that it will be a “live” meeting. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. thanks. howard schneider with reuters. i was just wondering if you could help us understand the, the narrative here because it feels like there’s been a level shift in the—in the dots, stronger gdp, less of a hit to unemployment, slower progress on inflation. and i’m wondering in, in this sort of—where’s the disinflation coming from? chair powell. sure. howard schneider. the labor market’s going to be stronger it looks like—it’s not coming from there. demand’s not coming down all that fast. according to gdp—you’ve doubled your, your estimate of gdp. so what’s the—what’s the narrative here? it seems like it’s getting more “immaculate,” rather than more messy.  chair powell. so you’re, you’re right that the data came in, i would say, consistent with, but on the high side of, expectations. and if you go back to the old—the former sep—the last sep in march, you will see that [compared with march, projected real gdp] growth moved up. these are not huge moves, but growth estimates moved up a bit. unemployment estimates moved down a bit. inflation estimates moved up a bit. and, you know, all three of those kind of point in the same direction—which is, you know, that perhaps more [monetary policy] restraint will be necessary than we had thought at the last meeting. so although the level, frankly, is, is pretty—the level of 5.6 [percent] is pretty consistent, if you think about it, where the [expected] federal funds rate was trading before the bank incidents of early march. so—but so we’ve kind of gone back to that. so your question is, where’s the—where’s the disinflation going to come from? and i, you know, i don’t think the story has really changed. we—the committee has consistently said and believed that the process of getting inflation down is going to be a gradual one. it’s going to take some time. and i think you go back to the—to the three-part framework for [analyzing] core pce inflation—which is, we think, as good an indicator as you can have for where inflation is going forward. you start with goods. with goods, we need to see continued healing in supply conditions—supply-side conditions. they’ve definitely improved a substantial amount, but if you talk to people in business, they will say it’s not back to where it was. so that’s, that’s one thing. and that should enable goods prices to continue—goods, goods inflation to continue to come down over time. in terms of housing services inflation—that’s another big piece. and, and you are seeing there that new rents in new, new leases are, are coming in at low levels. and it’s really a matter of time as that goes through the pipeline. in fact, i think any forecast that people are making right now about inflation coming down this year will, will contain a big dose of—this year and  next year—will contain a, a good amount of, of disinflation [coming] from that source. and, and that’s, again, probably going to come slower than we would [previously have expected it to come into] effect. that leaves, you know, the big sector, which is a little more than half, pardon me, of the—of core pce inflation that’s not housing services. and, you know, we see only the earliest signs of disinflation there. it’s a sector—it’s a very broad and diverse sector. i would say [that,] in a number of the parts of that sector, the largest cost would be wage cost. it’s the service sector, so it’s, it’s heavily labor intensive. and i think many analysts would say that the key to getting inflation down there is to have a continuing loosening in labor market conditions—which we have seen. we have actually seen, you know—i go through a number of indicators suggesting there has been some loosening in labor market conditions. we need to see that continue. i would almost say that the, the conditions that we need to see in place to get inflation down are, are coming into place. and that would be [real gdp] growth meaningfully below trend. it would be a labor market that’s loosening. it would be goods pipelines getting healthier and healthier and that kind of thing. there, there—the things are in place that we need to see, but the process of that actually working on inflation is going to take some time. michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. chair powell, what’s the value in, in pausing and signaling future hikes versus just hiking now? i mean, not to be flippant, but i don’t lose weight just by buying a gym membership—i have to actually go to the gym. sixteen of your colleagues put down a higher year-end ’23 rate today. a majority of you  think you’re going to have to go up by 50 basis points this year. so why not just rip off the band-aid and raise rates today? chair powell. so the—first, i would say that the, the question of speed is a separate question from the question—from the—from, from that of level. okay. so—and i think if you look at the sep, that is our estimate—our individual—it’s, it’s really a cumulation of our individual estimates of how far to go. i, i mentioned how, how we got to those numbers. in terms of speed, it’s, it’s what i said at the beginning, which is, speed was very important last year. as we get closer and closer to the destination—and, according to the sep, we’re not so far away from the destination, in most people’s accounting—it’s, it’s reasonable—it’s common sense to go a little slower, just as it was reasonable to go from 75 basis points to 50 to 25 at every meeting. and so the committee thought overall that it was appropriate to moderate the pace, if only slightly. then there are benefits to that. so that gives us more information to make decisions. we may try to make better decisions. i think it allows the economy a little more time to adapt as we—as we make our decisions going forward, and we’ll get to see, you know—we haven’t really—we don’t know the full extent of, of the consequences of the banking turmoil that we’ve seen. we, we—it would be early to see those, but we don’t know what the extent is. we’ll have some more time to see that unfold. i mean, it’s, it’s just the idea that we’re trying to get this right. and this is—if you think of the two things as separate variables, then i think—i think that the skip—i shouldn’t call it a skip—the, the decision makes sense. nick timiraos. i know you said july is live. with only one june employment—with only the june employment and the cpi report for june due to be released before the july meeting—you get the eci after, you get the senior loan officer survey after, you get some  bank earnings at the end of next month—what incremental information will the committee be using to inform their judgment on whether this is, in fact, a skip or a, a longer pause? chair powell. well, i think you’re adding that to the, the data that we’ve seen since the last meeting, too. you know, we—since we chose to maintain rates at this meeting, it’ll really be a three-month period of data that we can look at. and i think that’s a full quarter, and i think you can—you can draw more conclusions from that than you can from any six—any six- week period. we’ll look at those things. we’ll also look at the evolving risk picture. we’ll look at what’s happening in the financial sector. we’ll look at all the data, the evolving outlook, and we’ll make a decision. michelle smith. jeanna. jeanna smialek. thanks for taking our questions. jeanna smialek, new york times. you obviously, in your forecasts, marked up the sort of path for growth, marked down the path for unemployment, and marked up the path for inflation pretty notably. i wonder, you know, since march, what has changed to make you think that the economy’s a lot more resilient and inflation is going to be a lot more stubborn? and given that, you know, why do you feel confident that this is as high as you’re going to have to revise the federal funds rate? or do you think it’s possible we could have even a higher than 5.6 percent terminal by the end of this, this cycle? chair powell. you know, i—i mean, on the first part, i just think we’re following the data and also the outlook. the economy is—the labor market, i think, has surprised many, if not all, analysts over the last couple of years with its extraordinary resilience, really. and it’s, it’s just remarkable. and that’s really, if you think about it—that’s what’s driving it. it’s job  creation. it’s, it’s wages moving up. it’s, it’s supporting spending, which in turn is supporting hiring. and it’s, it’s really the engine, it seems, that is—that is driving the economy. and so it’s, it’s really the, the data. in terms of, you know—we, we always write down at these meetings what we think the appropriate terminal rate will be at the end of this year. that’s, that’s how we do it. it’s based on our, our own individual assessments of what the most likely path of the economy is. it can be—it can actually, in reality, wind up being lower or higher. and, you know, there’s really no way to know. but it’s—it is—it’s, it’s what people think as of today, and as the—as the data come in, it, it can move around during the intermeeting period. it could wind up back in the same place. but it really will be data driven. i can’t—i can’t tell you that that i ever have a lot of confidence that we can see where the—where the federal funds rate will be that far in advance. michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. mr. chairman, thanks for taking my question. you had said back at the end of may that you thought risks were getting closer to being into balance. is that still the case, or has your mind changed about the balance of risks out there? and also, could you give us an idea of what would be a sufficiently restrictive funds rate? is the—obviously, the current rate, according to the committee, is not sufficiently restrictive. is it 5.6? is it 6? where is sufficiently restrictive? thank you. chair powell. you know, i, i would say again that i think that, over time, the balance of risks, as we move from very, you know—from interest rates that are effectively zero now to 5 percentage points with, with an sep calling for additional hikes—i think we’ve moved much closer to our destination, which is that sufficiently restrictive rate, and i think that means by—almost by definition that the—that the risks of, of sort of overdoing it and under,  underdoing it are, are getting closer to being in balance. i still think, and my, my colleagues agree, that, that the risks to inflation are to the upside still. so we don’t—we don’t think we’re there with inflation yet because we’re just looking at the data. and if you look at the—at the full range of, of inflation data, particularly the core data, you just—you just aren’t seeing a lot of progress over the last year. headline, of course, inflation has come down materially, but, as you know, we look at core [inflation] as a better indicator of where inflation overall is going. sufficiently—so i think, you know, what, what we’d like to see is credible evidence that inflation is topping out and then beginning to come down. that’s, that’s what we want to see— of course that’s what we want to see. and i, i think it’s—it’s also—we understand that there are lags, but remember that it’s, it’s more than a year since financial conditions began tightening. i think it’s—i think the reason we’re, we’re comfortable pausing is that we are still—much of the tightening took place over last summer and later into the year. and i think it’s, it’s reasonable to think that some of that may come into effect. so we’re, you know—i think stretching out into a more moderate pace is appropriate to, to allow you to make that judgment of sufficiency, you know, more—with more data over time. michelle smith. rachel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. rachel siegel from the washington post. thanks for taking our questions. i wanted to ask further on the lag effects—when you’re considering when you would hike again throughout the course of the year, are there things that you would expect to kick in as those lag effects come, come into effect that would inform your decisions? have you learned things over the past year that give you some sense of timeline for when to expect those lags to come into effect?  chair powell. yeah. so it’s a—it’s a challenging thing in, in economics. it’s, it’s sort of standard thinking that monetary policy affects economic activity with long and variable lags. of course, these days, financial conditions begin to tighten well in advance of actual rate hikes. so if you—if you look back when we were lifting off, we started talking about lifting off—by the time we had lifted off, the two-year [interest rate], which is a pretty good estimate of where [monetary] policy is going, had gone from 20 basis points to 200 basis points. so in that sense, tightening happens much sooner than it used to in a world where— where news was in newspapers and not, you know, not on, on the wire. so that’s, that’s different. but it’s still the case that what you see is interest-sensitive spending is affected very, very quickly—so housing, and durable goods, and things like that. but broader demand, and spending, and, and asset values, and things like that—they just take longer. and you can pretty much find research to support whatever answer you would like on that. so there’s not any certainty or agreement in the profession on how long it takes. so, you know, then that makes it challenging, of course. so we’re, we’re looking at the calendar. we’re, we’re looking at what’s happening in the economy. we’re having to make these judgments. again, it’s one of the main reasons why it makes sense to go at a slightly more moderate pace now as we seek that, that ultimate—i can’t point to—that ultimate endpoint. i can’t point to a specific data point. i think we’ll see it when we see inflation, you know, really, really flattening out reliably and then starting to soften. i think we’ll know that we’re—that it’s working. and, ideally, by, by taking a little more time, we won’t go well past the level where we need to go.  rachel siegel. i was curious if you could give us an update on what you’re seeing on credit tightening since the bank incidents for march and how you’re teasing that out apart from these lag effects. chair powell. so it’s, it’s too early still to, to try to assess the full extent of what that might mean. and, you know, that’s something we’re going to be watching, of course. and, you know, if we were to see what, what we would view as significant tightening beyond what would normally be expected because of, of this channel, then, you know, we would factor that into account on, on—in, in making rate decisions. so that’s, that’s how we think about it. michelle smith. let’s go to chris. chris rugaber. thanks. chris rugaber at associated press. you mentioned that many of the trends are in place that you want to see—core services ex. housing has come in pretty low in the past couple of months. and, as you noted, a significant portion of core inflation is now housing prices. and then we’ve had some quirks in used-car prices. so given that these trends are in place, i guess i’m sort of asking the flip side of nick’s question: why signal additional rate hikes? aren’t things headed in the direction you need? why not simply give it even more time? or—it’s surprising to see so much hawkishness in the dots, given what we’re seeing recently. chair powell. yeah. so, you know, we’ve—remember, we’ve—we’re two and a half years into this—or two and a quarter years into this. and forecasters, including fed forecasters, have consistently thought that inflation was about to turn down and, you know, traditional—you know, typically forecasted that it would and been wrong. so i think if you—i think if you look at the—at core pce inflation overall—look at it over the last six months—you’re just not seeing a lot of progress. it’s running, and it’s running  at a level, you know, over 4½ percent—far above our, our target and not really, you know, moving down. we want to see it moving down decisively. that’s all. we’re, you know, of course, we’re going to get inflation down to 2 percent over time. we, we don’t want to do—we, we want to do that with the minimum damage we can to the economy, of course. but we have to get inflation down to 2 percent, and we will. and we just don’t see that yet. so, hence, you see today’s policy decision: both, both to write down further rate hikes by the end of this year but also to, you know, to take—to, to moderate somewhat the pace with which we’re moving. chris rugaber. quick follow-up. i mean, the last press conference you mentioned you didn’t see wages driving inflation. and, you know, there was some research from the san francisco fed suggesting wages aren’t necessarily a key driver. but you’ve talked about the labor market today and the need for softening. can you give us a little more, specifically, of how you see the tight labor market driving inflation at this point? thank you. chair powell. right. so i’m, i’m not going to comment on any particular paper, but i, i would say that the—i think the overall picture is that at the beginning in, you know, early 2021, inflation was really becoming from very strong demand for—largely for goods. people were still at home. they had money in the bank, and they wanted to spend—they spent a lot on goods. and, of course, at the same time—and because of that high demand, to some extent, supply chains got all snarled up. so prices went way up. inflation went way up. so that was the, the origin, and it wasn’t really particularly about the labor market or wages. but as you—as you moved into—through ’21, into ’22, and now in ’23, i think many, many analysts believe that it will be important—an important part of getting inflation down, especially in the nonhousing  services sector, to getting wage inflation back to a level that is sustainable, that is consistent with 2 percent inflation. we actually have seen wages broadly move down but just at a quite gradual pace. so— and that’s, you know, that’s a little bit of the finding of the bernanke paper with blanchard of a few weeks ago, which is very consistent with, with what i, i would think. michelle smith. let’s go to michael mckee. michael mckee. michael mckee from bloomberg radio and television. you said in the past that you don’t like to surprise markets. it’s kind of been the fed’s view markets should have an idea of what you’re going to do before you go in. you also said a number of times that it would take a while to bring inflation down. you reiterated that again today and that we, we’d get to a point where inflation could be sticky. so i’m wondering, as we go into the next meetings, how wall street or others should look at your reaction function. what will you be reacting to—time or data? in other words, if nothing much changes—if we’re looking at the same sort of labor market, the same sort of inflation levels in july or in september or november—will you move because you’ve said you feel you need to? is it time that’s going to require additional movement, or would it be reversal in inflation? chair powell. so i, i don’t want to deal with, with hypotheticals about different ways data might move. and so, we, you know—we of course—we’re not—we don’t go out of our way to surprise markets or the public. at the same time, our main focus has to be on getting the policy right. and that’s, that’s what we’re doing here, and that’s what we’ll do for the upcoming meetings.  i will say the july meeting will be “live,” and we’ll just have to see. i think you’ll, you’ll see the data, you’ll hear fed people talking about it, and, and markets will have to make a— make a judgment. michael mckee. well, do you think inflation is likely to continue coming down based on the lags and based on your threat of additional movement? or are we going to be in a period where we’re not going to know what’s happening? chair powell. you know, i, i think if you look at—if, if you just look at—i’ll just point you to the forecast. so inflation is running—core pce inflation is running at about 4½, a little higher than 4½ percent. and the, the median fomc participant thinks it will go down to 3.9 on a 12-month basis. this is by the end of this year. so that’s expecting pretty substantial progress. that’s, that’s a pretty significant decline for half a year. so that’s, that’s the forecast. you know, we’ll—we do try to be transparent in our reaction function. we’re, we’re committed to getting inflation down. and that’s the number-one thing. so that’s how i think about it. michelle smith. let’s go to victoria. victoria guida. victoria guida with politico. could you talk about the balance sheet and how you’re thinking about it? what, what are you looking for to judge whether we’re approaching reserve scarcity? and is treasury issuance going to affect that? also, are you considering lowering the rrp rate in order to take some pressure off banks? chair powell. so let me say, first of all, on the treasury part of it—if i can talk about that and then go back to the balance sheet. so on that—of course, we’ve been very focused on that for a couple of months, as everyone has. [the] treasury has laid out its borrowing plans publicly. i think we all saw—i saw the secretary’s comments yesterday to the  effect that [the] treasury has consulted widely with market participants about how to avoid market disruption and that they’re going to watch carefully for that. so that’s, that’s from the treasury, which actually sets the, you know, the, the borrowings. at the fed, we’ll be monitoring market conditions carefully as the treasury refills the, the tga. the adjustment process is very likely to involve both a reduction in the rrp facility and also in reserves. it’s really hard to say at the—at the beginning of this which will be—which will be greater. we are starting at a very high level of reserves—and still elevated over rrp take-up, for that matter—so we don’t think reserves are likely to become scarce in the near term or even over the course of the year. so that’s, that’s—that’s the—that’s the treasury part of the answer. we will, of course, continue to monitor conditions in money markets, and we’re prepared to make adjustments to make sure that, that monetary policy transmission works. was there another part of your question? victoria guida. yeah—are you considering lowering the rrp rate to help take some pressure off banks? chair powell. so we, we have a number of—i would say the [on] rrp [facility] doesn’t look like it’s, it’s pulling money out of—out of the banking system. it’s actually been shrinking here lately. so i don’t think—that’s not something, something we’ve thought about a lot over time. it doesn’t really look like that’s, that’s something that we would do. i think it’s—i think it’s a tool that we have. if we want to use it, we can. there are other tools we can—we can use to address money market issues. but i wouldn’t say that that’s something that’s likely that we would do in the near term.  michelle smith. jonnelle. jonnelle marte. jonnelle marte with bloomberg. have you seen sufficient cooling in the housing market to bring inflation down? for example, how does the recent rebound affect your forecasts, and how does it factor into monetary policy? chair powell. so certainly housing—very interest sensitive, and it’s the first place, really, or one of the first places, that’s either helped by low rates or, or that is held back by, by higher rates. and we certainly saw that over the course of the last year. we now see housing putting in a bottom and maybe even moving up a little bit. you know, we’re watching that situation carefully. i do think we—we will see rents, rents and, and house prices filtering into, into housing services inflation. and i, i don’t see them coming up quickly. i, i do see them kind of—kind of wandering around at a relatively low level now, and that’s appropriate. jonnelle marte. do you think you’ll have to target that with further rate increases? chair powell. well, i think we, we look at everything. we don’t just look at housing. so i think, you know, the way it works is the individual participants sit in their offices all over the country, and they write down their forecast and—including their most likely forecasts—including their rate forecast. and then they send it in on friday afternoon, and we cumulate it, and then we publish it for you. so that’s how—that’s how they do that. well, i don’t know that housing is, is itself going to be driving the rates picture, but it’s part of it. michelle smith. let’s go to edward. edward lawrence. thank you for taking the question, mr. chairman. edward lawrence with fox business. so i want to go back to comments you made about, in the past,  about unsustainable fiscal path. the cbo projects the federal deficit to be $2.8 trillion in 10 years. the cbo also says that federal debt will be $52 trillion by 2033. at what point do you talk more firmly with lawmakers about fiscal responsibility? because—assuming monetary policy cannot handle alone the inflation or keep that inflation in check with the higher-level spending. chair powell. i don’t do that. that’s really not my job. we—we hope and expect that other policymakers will respect our independence on, on monetary policy. and we don’t see ourselves as, as, you know, the judges of appropriate fiscal policy. i will say, and many of my predecessors have said, that we’re on an unsustainable fiscal path and, and that needs to be addressed over time. but i think trying to get into, into that with lawmakers would be—would be kind of inappropriate, given our independence and our need to stick to our knitting. edward lawrence. is there any conversation then about the federal reserve financing some of that debt that we’re seeing coming down the pike? chair powell. no. under no circumstances. michelle smith. courtenay. courtenay brown. thanks for taking our questions, chair powell. so looking at the sep, it looks like gdp for this year was raised significantly—your forecast for gdp this year. the unemployment rate, meanwhile, was pulled downward. and so should we take that as a sign that the committee is more confident about the prospects of a soft landing—at least more—at least as it relates to what you were expecting in, in march? chair powell. you know, i—i would just say it this way. i continue to think—and this really hasn’t changed—that there is a path to getting inflation back down to 2 percent without having to see the kind of sharp downturn and, and large losses of employment that we’ve  seen in so many past instances. it’s, it’s possible. a—in a way, a strong labor market is—that, that gradually cools could, could aid that along—it could aid that along. but i, i guess i want to come back to the, the main thing, which is, though, simply this. we, we see—the committee— as you can see from the sep, the committee is completely unified in the need to get inflation down to 2 percent and will do whatever it takes to get it down to 2 percent over time. that is our plan. and, you know, we, we understand that allowing inflation to get entrenched into the—in the u.s. economy is the thing that we cannot, cannot allow to happen for the benefit of today’s workers and families and businesses but also for the future. getting price stability back and, and restored will benefit generations of people as long as it’s sustained. and it really is the bedrock of the economy. and, and you should understand that that is our top priority. courtenay brown. just a quick follow-up on that. i’m just a little confused because you said the committee will do whatever it takes to get inflation down over time, but when i look at the sep, inflation is still projected to be elevated next year, but the fed funds rate is lower than where it is now. can you help me understand that? chair powell. sure. so, you know, if you look two and three years out with, with the forecast—first of all, i wouldn’t—i wouldn’t put too much weight on forecasts even one year out because they’re, they’re so highly uncertain. but what they’re showing is that as inflation comes down in the—in the forecast, if you don’t lower interest rates, then real rates are actually going up, right? so just to maintain a real rate, the nominal rate at that point—two years out, let’s say—should come down just to maintain real rates. and if—and actually, you know, since we’re, we’re probably going to—we’re, we’re having real rates that are going to have to be meaningfully positive and significantly. so for us to get inflation down, that probably means— that, that certainly means that, that it will be appropriate to cut rates at such time as inflation is  coming down really significantly. and again, we’re talking about a couple of years out. i think, as, as anyone can see, not a single person on the committee wrote down a rate cut this year, nor do i think it is at all likely to be appropriate, if you think about it. inflation has not really moved down. it has—it has not so far reacted much to our—to our existing rate hikes. and so we’re going have to keep at it. michelle smith. julie. julie chabanas. i’m sorry. thank you. hi, chair powell. julie chabanas, afp news agency. the may job report showed a rebound in may in the black workers’ unemployment. is it consistent with the fed’s maximum-employment mandate? are you worried about that—about this rebound? chair powell. so we are, of course, worried about—there are—there are long- standing differences in racial and ethnic groups across, across our labor market. that’s a factor that we don’t—we can’t really address with our tools. but we do consider that when we’re thinking about what constitutes maximum employment—it is, for us, a broad and inclusive goal. and so we do watch that. but remember, all unemployment, including black unemployment, has been bouncing around right near historic lows—historic modern lows here. so we’re still talking about, i mean, what is as strong a labor market as we’ve seen in, you know, a half- century here in the united states. so overall unemployment of 3.7 percent is, is higher—three- tenths higher than it was measured to be at the last—a month ago. but, still, it’s extraordinarily low. and so it’s a very, very tight labor market. michelle smith. megan. megan cassella. thank you. i want to follow up first a little bit just on the rent question on housing. we heard governor waller talk about how—i’ll back up. we haven’t  quite seen the slowdown in rents show up in cpi yet. and we did hear governor waller talk about how an uptick in housing might mean that there’s not going to be as much relief coming or a shorter bit of relief than we thought. can you talk about how you’re thinking about that and how that played into today’s outcome? chair powell. i wouldn’t say—that’s, you know—as a factual matter, that’s correct. we do need to see, you know, rents bottom out here or at least stay quite low in terms of their increases because we want—we want the, you know, we want inflation to come down. and rental is, is a very large part of the cpi—about a third—and it’s about half of that for the pce. so it’s important. and so we’re—it’s something that we’re watching very carefully. it’s part of the overall picture. i wouldn’t say it’s the decisive part, but take a step back. what you see is— look at—look at core inflation over the past six months, a year. you’re just not seeing a lot of progress—not the kind of progress we want to see. and that, that’s—it’s hard to avoid that. and, you know, the committee—people on the committee—the median went up significantly, so that the median participant now thinks that core pce inflation on a 12-month basis will be 3.9 percent this year. so, once again, every year for the past three years, it’s gone up over the course of the year, and that’s doing that again. so we see that, and we see that inflation forecasts are coming in low again, and we see that—that that tells us that we need to do more. and so we’re—that’s why you see the sep with—where it is. megan cassella. could you also talk briefly about your outlook for wages and, given the recent slowdown in core services excluding housing, how far you think wages might need to fall in order to get inflation back in line? chair powell. so wages will continue to increase. so we, we, you know—what we’re talking about is having wage increases still at a very strong level but at a level that’s  consistent with 2 percent inflation over time. and so i, i think we’ve seen some progress—all, all of the major measures of wages have, have moved down from extremely elevated—not extremely elevated—highly elevated levels a year or so ago, and they’re, they’re moving back down but, but quite gradually. and, and, you know, we want to see that, that process continue gradually. of course, it’s great to see wage increases, particularly for people at the lower end of the income spectrum. but we want that as part of the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent, which benefits everyone. i mean, inflation hurts those same people more than anyone else. people on a fixed income are hurt the worst, and the fastest, by high inflation. michelle smith. greg. greg robb. thank you so much, chair powell. greg robb from marketwatch. i just wondered if the committee has talked at all about the labor market and, and—there, there’s strikes now in hollywood and now the united autoworkers are talking about a possible strike. i mean, aren’t workers—they have—we have some—workers have power now and are going to be seeking higher wages. does that come up in your discussions? thanks. chair powell. so the topic of wages in the labor market and dynamics in the labor market could—is about as central a topic to our discussions as, as anything. i mean, it’s, it’s very—labor economics, you know, and the labor market are utterly central. you know, it’s half of our mandate. so we spend a lot of time talking about that. i think, you know, we—there, there are structural issues that are really not for the fed. and so we don’t spend a lot of time— although we take notice of, of what’s going on, but we’re not, you know—we’re not involved in discussions or debates over, over strikes and things like that. but we—you know, we, we look, and we see what’s going on. and, you know, we’re making judgments about what it will take to get inflation down to 2 percent in the aggregate. and as i said, don’t think that was about—i  didn’t—most folks would say now it wasn’t really about that—about wages at the beginning. and it’s becoming more about that as we—as we get into really service-sector inflation, which is the part of the economy where we have seen the least progress. michelle smith. let’s go to mark for the last question. mark hamrick. thank you, mr. chairman. mark hamrick with bankrate. wondering what your thoughts are now about systemic risk now that we’re about three months past the failure of silicon valley bank. and also, specifically, what are the risks associated with commercial real estate as well as nonbank financials? and could you further elevate those risks with higher still rates, possibly for longer? chair powell. so i’m trying to think where to start. i’ll start with commercial real estate. we—of course, we’re watching that situation very carefully. there’s a substantial amount of commercial real estate in the banking system. a, a large part of it is in smaller banks. it’s well distributed—to the extent it’s well distributedthen, then the system could, could take losses. we do expect that there will be losses, but they’ll be—they’ll be banks that have concentrations, and those banks will experience larger losses. so we’re well aware of that. we’re monitoring it carefully. you know, it feels like—it feels like something that will be around for some time, as opposed to, you know, something that will suddenly hit and, and, you know, work its way into systemic risk. in terms of nonbank financials—financial sector—there’s been a ton of work. and, you know, clearly in the—in the pandemic, it really was—it was the nonbank financial sector where, where issues really arose. and, you know, there’s a lot of work going on in—with the administration, in particular, leading that to try to address issues in the treasury market and, and in all kinds of areas in the nonbank financial market. and—but, you know, our jurisdiction at  the fed is over banks—actually bank holding companies and some banks. so that’s, that’s really our main focus. you know, in terms of the events of march—as i mentioned earlier, we will be carefully monitoring that situation. you know, our, our job generally involves worrying about a lot of things that may go wrong, and that would include the banks. it might be hard for me to identify something that we don’t worry about rather than that we do worry about. so we’re watching those things very carefully. and as we see things unfold—as we see what’s happening with credit conditions and, and also all the individual banks that are out there, you know, we’ll be able to take, to the extent it’s appropriate, we can take, if they’re macroeconomic implications, we can take that into account in our rate setting. and so i guess that’s what i would say. mark hamrick. can i just follow up on the last part of that? do you—do you risk further exacerbating those issues if you get up to another 50 basis points? chair powell. so that’s—and, and i was—i guess i meant to address that by saying as we—as we watch, we’ll see what’s happening. and if we—if we’re seeing the kind of tightening of conditions that, that you could be referring to, then we can factor that—because really, we’re—we use our—our rate tool is, is, you know, is—it really has macroeconomic purposes. so we’ll, we’ll take that into account. of course, we have responsibility for financial stability as well. and that also is a factor that we’re always going to be considering. thank you very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 3 attended through the discussion of the economic and financial situation and all of wednesday’s session. page 2 federal open market committee  erin e. ferris, principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board michelle m. neal, head of markets, federal reserve bank of new york jonas fisher, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of chicago edward nelson, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board glenn follette, associate director, division of research and statistics, board nicolas petrosky-nadeau, vice president, federal reserve bank of san francisco jennifer gallagher, assistant to the board, division of board members, board achilles sangster ii, senior information manager, division of monetary affairs, board carlos garriga, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of st. louis zeynep senyuz, deputy associate director, division of monetary affairs, board david glancy, 4 principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board margie shanks, deputy secretary, office of the secretary, board christopher j. gust, associate director, division of monetary affairs, board nitish ranjan sinha, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board a. lee smith, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of kansas city jane e. ihrig, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board hiroatsu tanaka, 5 senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board michael t. kiley, deputy director, division of financial stability, board mary h. tian, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board don h. kim,2 senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board robert l. triplett iii, first vice president, federal reserve bank of dallas edward s. knotek ii, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of cleveland clara vega, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board andreas lehnert, director, division of financial stability, board daniel j. vine, principal economist, division of research and statistics, board paul lengermann, assistant director, division of research and statistics, board jeffrey d. walker,2 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board kurt f. lewis, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board geng li, assistant director, division of research and statistics, board laura lipscomb, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board brent meyer, assistant vice president, federal reserve bank of atlanta bernardo c. morais, principal economist, division of international finance, board 4 attended tuesday’s session only. fabian winkler, principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board alexander l. wolman, vice president, federal reserve bank of richmond paul r. wood, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board rebecca zarutskie, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board attended from the discussion of the economic and financial situation through the end of tuesday’s session. 5 minutes of the meeting of june 13–14, 2023 page 3  developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets. policy-sensitive rates increased over the intermeeting period, reflecting indications of continued resilience in the economy, persistently elevated core inflation, and reduced downside tail risks following the resolution of the debt limit. the shift in policy expectations contributed significantly to higher treasury yields. the increase in nominal yields primarily reflected higher real rates rather than inflation compensation. broad equity prices rose, although the outperformance was concentrated in a handful of companies with a large market capitalization. cyclical sectors fared better than sectors that tend to appreciate in a downturn, suggesting some reduced investor concern about downside risks to growth. investor sentiment about the banking sector improved as perceived tail risks regarding regional banks appeared to have receded. equity prices for regional banks rose over the intermeeting period but were still well below early march levels. financial conditions indexes were roughly unchanged, as higher rates and a stronger dollar were offset by higher equity prices and narrower credit spreads. the vast majority of respondents to the open market desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants expected no rate change at this meeting. while the median path from the surveys pointed to no rate changes through early 2024, there was significant dispersion across respondents, and respondents saw a clear probability of additional tightening at coming meetings. respondents’ average probability distribution for the level of the peak policy rate shifted higher since the may meeting and respondents on average assigned about 60 percent probability to the peak being above the current target range. the market-implied path for the policy rate continued to show some decline this year but less so than it had in recent months. measures of uncertainty about the path of the policy rate derived from options remained very elevated, though they came down some over the intermeeting period. desk survey respondents still saw a recession occurring in the near term as quite likely, but the expected timing was again pushed later, as economic data pointed to the continued resilience of economic activity. overall, respondents generally continued to expect that any downturn would be neither deep nor prolonged. with regard to inflation expectations, respondents marked up their projections for quarterly core personal consumption ex- penditures (pce) inflation in the second and third quarters of this year, while projections for later quarters were little changed. the manager then turned to money market developments and policy implementation. the median respondent to the desk surveys expected the three-month bill yield to increase slightly relative to the similar-maturity overnight index swap (ois) rate and to remain above it into the fourth quarter. this expectation likely reflected a combination of rising net supply of bills as part of the treasury department’s plan to rebuild the treasury general account (tga) following the resolution of the debt limit and expectations for healthy investor demand for bills. the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility, which continued to support effective policy implementation and control over the federal funds rate, saw somewhat lower participation since the resolution of the debt limit, consistent with the historical experience that on rrp participation is typically responsive to changes in money market conditions. the median respondent to the desk’s survey of primary dealers expected on rrp participation to trend lower over the rest of this year. the staff assessed that the replenishment of the tga and the ongoing balance sheet runoff, among other factors, were likely to subtract from reserves more than the decline in on rrp participation would add to them. on net, the staff judged that reserves at the end of the year were likely to remain abundant. uncertainty surrounding the outlooks for both reserves and on rrp participation was substantial. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the june 13–14 meeting suggested that real gross domestic product (gdp) was expanding at a modest pace in the second quarter. labor market conditions remained tight in recent months, as job gains were robust and the unemployment rate was low. consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for pce—continued to be elevated in april. labor market conditions remained tight in april and may. total nonfarm payroll employment increased at a robust pace during those two months. the unemployment rate edged up, on net, but was still at a low level of 3.7 percent in may. on balance, the unemployment rate page 4 federal open market committee  for african americans moved up to 5.6 percent, while the jobless rate for hispanics moved down to 4.0 percent. in aggregate, the labor force participation rate held steady in april and may, and the employment-topopulation ratio ticked down. the private-sector job openings rate in april—as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey—was unchanged from its relatively high first-quarter average, though it was lower than a year earlier. recent measures of nominal wage growth continued to be elevated, although lower than their highs last year. over the 12 months ending in may, average hourly earnings for all employees increased 4.3 percent, below its peak of 5.9 percent early last year. over the year ending in the first quarter, compensation per hour in the business sector increased 3.2 percent, down from 5.5 percent a year earlier. consumer price inflation remained elevated. total pce price inflation had eased since the middle of last year, reflecting declines in consumer energy prices and softening consumer food price inflation, but recent readings for core pce price inflation—which excludes changes in consumer energy prices and most consumer food prices and usually provides a better signal about future inflation than the more volatile total inflation measure— were little changed. total pce price inflation was 4.4 percent over the 12 months ending in april, and core pce price inflation was 4.7 percent—the same as the 12-month percent change recorded in january. in may, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 4.0 percent, and core cpi inflation was 5.3 percent—only slightly below its january reading. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 4.8 percent in april. survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations in may from the university of michigan surveys of consumers and the federal reserve bank of new york’s survey of consumer expectations remained within the range of their values reported in the decade before the pandemic; near-term measures of inflation expectations from these surveys moved down in may and continued to be below their peaks seen last year. real gdp appeared to be increasing modestly in the second quarter following its stronger first-quarter gain. private domestic final purchases (pdfp)—which includes pce, residential investment, and business fixed investment and often provides a better signal of underlying economic momentum than gdp—looked to be ex- panding more slowly in the second quarter than its robust first-quarter pace. for the first half as a whole, pdfp growth seemed to be more resilient than in the second half of last year. the annual revisions to international trade statistics suggested that net exports contributed positively to u.s. real gdp growth in the first quarter, with real exports rebounding more strongly than real imports following their fourth-quarter declines. in april, however, the nominal trade deficit widened notably, as nominal exports decreased and nominal imports rose further. foreign economic growth rebounded in the first quarter, reflecting in part the reopening of china’s economy from its covid-19-related shutdowns and strong services-sector activity in other asian countries, canada, and mexico. in the euro area, however, real gdp contracted modestly for a second consecutive quarter amid a pullback in consumer spending. indicators pointed to a step-down in the pace of foreign economic growth in the second quarter, with the impetus from china’s reopening dissipating and global manufacturing activity remaining weak. global prices for energy and agricultural commodities were little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period, while prices for metals fell further. declines in retail energy prices since the beginning of the year contributed to a notable easing in headline consumer price inflation in the foreign economies. by contrast, core inflation had yet to materially decline from its recent highs in many economies. in this context, and with tight labor market conditions, foreign central banks underscored the need to raise policy rates further or hold them at sufficiently restrictive levels to bring inflation back to their respective targets and be well positioned in case inflation failed to decline as expected. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, market participants appeared to interpret incoming data as signaling, on balance, more resilience in economic activity than previously assumed and viewed communications from fomc participants overall as pointing to a tighter path for policy than expected. as a result, treasury yields and the expected future path for the federal funds rate shifted upward significantly. meanwhile, broad equity prices also increased notably. financing conditions remained moderately restrictive, but credit availability generally remained solid. the expected path of the policy rate implied by market quotes moved up notably over the intermeeting period. minutes of the meeting of june 13–14, 2023 page 5  a straight read of federal funds futures rates suggested that market participants expected that the federal funds rate would be roughly flat over the course of the rest of this year. the year-end expected rate was about 70 basis points higher than the year-end expectation before the may fomc meeting. beyond this year, the policy rate path implied by ois quotes also moved up, to about 3.7 percent by the end of 2024. similarly, nominal treasury yields rose significantly. the rise in nominal yields mostly reflected an increase in real yields, as measures of inflation compensation were little changed, on net, amid somewhat mixed news on inflation. measures of uncertainty about the path of interest rates remained very elevated by historical standards. the s&p 500 stock price index increased sizably, on net, over the intermeeting period, led by technology-related stocks. the vix—the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500 index—edged down, on balance, and ended the period near the 30th percentile of its historical distribution. bank equity price indexes moved up notably, on net, over the intermeeting period. stock prices for large banks were only somewhat below their levels before the failure of silicon valley bank (svb), while those for regional banks remained below their levels in early march. market-based policy rate expectations rose notably in most advanced foreign economies, as core inflation data surprised to the upside in some countries and central bank communications were perceived as pointing to more restrictive policy than expected. notwithstanding the rise in global yields, foreign equity prices, credit spreads, and risk sentiment in foreign markets were little changed over the intermeeting period. the staff’s tradeweighted broad dollar index was also little changed, on net, but the exchange value of the dollar appreciated significantly against the chinese renminbi amid increased investor concerns over china’s economic growth prospects. conditions in overnight bank funding and repurchase agreement markets remained generally stable over the intermeeting period. the 25 basis point increase in administered rates at the may fomc meeting fully passed through to overnight money market rates. spreads and issuance volumes in unsecured short-term funding markets stayed within their typical ranges. in may, yields of treasury bills maturing in june and thus potentially affected by the federal debt limit rose sharply before largely retracing those increases after an agreement was reached to suspend the debt limit. in domestic credit markets, borrowing costs for businesses, households, and municipalities increased notably over the intermeeting period. interest rates on newly originated bank loans to businesses and households in the first quarter rose further above their peaks from the previous tightening cycle, and yields on leveraged loans also rose, reaching levels close to their peak at the onset of the pandemic. rates also moved up on a broad array of fixed-income securities, including investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds, municipal bonds, both agency and non-agency commercial mortgagebacked securities (cmbs), and agency residential mortgage-backed securities. the increases in yields on these instruments over the intermeeting period were generally in line with, or less than, the changes in their treasury benchmarks. small businesses and households saw continued increases in their borrowing costs. rates on 30-year conforming residential mortgages stepped up, broadly in line with increases in comparable-duration treasury yields. interest rates on credit card offers continued to rise through april, and auto loan interest rates moved sideways during the intermeeting period. both credit card and auto loan interest rates stood at, or near, their highest levels since the global financial crisis. banks’ ability to fund loans to businesses and consumers appeared to have stabilized in recent weeks but remained somewhat strained relative to before the closure of svb in march. although banks continued to experience outflows of core deposits, the pace of those outflows moderated substantially relative to march, suggesting some easing of bank funding pressures. banks also continued to attract inflows of large time deposits, reflecting higher interest rates on new certificates of deposit. total bank assets were little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period. in capital markets, funding had generally been resilient. issuance of nonfinancial investment-grade corporate bonds rose at a robust pace in may after slowing in april, partly due to the “earnings blackout” period. speculative-grade issuance increased in late april and in may but remained subdued by historical standards. gross issuance of municipal bonds was solid in april and may. conditions in the leveraged loan and cmbs markets were somewhat more strained. leveraged loan issuance remained subdued, reflecting weak investor demand amid concerns over the credit worthiness of borrowers. both agency and non-agency cmbs issuance volumes were low in may relative to pre-pandemic levels. in addition, for small businesses, credit availability continued to show signs of tightening. page 6 federal open market committee  credit remained easily available in the residential mortgage market for high credit score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. for borrowers with lower scores, credit availability tightened slightly in april but remained close to pre-pandemic levels. in consumer credit markets, conditions stayed generally accommodative, with credit available for most borrowers. the credit quality of most businesses and households remained solid, although market participants appeared to expect some deterioration in the coming quarters, which could weaken lender balance sheets and possibly weigh on credit availability. a measure of the may cmbs delinquency rate showed about a 50 basis point increase, driven by a sharp rise in the delinquency rate for office buildings. staff economic outlook the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the june fomc meeting continued to assume that the effects of the expected further tightening in bank credit conditions, amid already tight financial conditions, would lead to a mild recession starting later this year, followed by a moderately paced recovery. real gdp was projected to decelerate in the current quarter and the next one before declining modestly in both the fourth quarter of this year and first quarter of next year. real gdp growth over 2024 and 2025 was projected to be below the staff’s estimate of potential output growth. the unemployment rate was forecast to increase this year, peak next year, and remain near that level through 2025. current tight resource utilization in both product and labor markets was forecast to ease, with the level of real output moving below the staff’s estimate of potential output in 2025 and the unemployment rate rising above the staff’s estimate of its natural rate at that time. the staff’s inflation forecast was little revised relative to the previous projection, and supply–demand imbalances in both goods markets and labor markets were still judged to be easing only slowly. on a four-quarter change basis, total pce price inflation was projected to be 3.0 percent this year, with core inflation at 3.7 percent. core goods inflation was forecast to move down further this year and then remain subdued. housing services inflation was considered to have about peaked and was expected to move down over the rest of the year. core nonhousing services inflation was projected to slow gradually as nominal wage growth eased further. reflecting the effects of the easing in resource utilization over the projection, core inflation was forecast to slow through next year but remain moderately above 2 percent. with expected declines in consumer energy prices and further moderation in food price inflation, total inflation was projected to run below core inflation this year and the next. in 2025, both total and core pce price inflation were expected to be close to 2 percent. the staff continued to judge that uncertainty around the baseline projection was considerable and still viewed the risks as being influenced importantly by the potential macroeconomic implications of banking-sector developments, which could end up being more, or less, negative than assumed in the baseline. given the continued strength in labor market conditions and the resilience of consumer spending, however, the staff saw the possibility of the economy continuing to grow slowly and avoiding a downturn as almost as likely as the mild-recession baseline. on balance, the staff saw the risks around the baseline inflation forecast as tilted to the upside, as economic scenarios with higher inflation appeared more likely than scenarios with lower inflation and because inflation could continue to be more persistent than expected and inflation expectations could become unanchored after a long period of elevated inflation. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2023 through 2025 and over the longer run. the projections were based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections (sep) was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that economic activity had continued to expand at a modest pace. nonetheless, job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation remained elevated. participants agreed that the u.s. banking system was sound and resilient. they commented that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. however, participants agreed that the extent of these effects remained uncertain. against this background, participants concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. minutes of the meeting of june 13–14, 2023 page 7  in assessing the economic outlook, most participants noted that real gdp growth had been resilient in recent quarters. participants generally judged that growth would be subdued over the remainder of this year. they assessed that the cumulative tightening of monetary policy over the past year had contributed significantly to more restrictive financial conditions and lower demand in the most interest rate sensitive sectors of the economy, especially housing and business investment. participants also acknowledged uncertainty about the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy and discussed the extent to which the full effects of monetary tightening on the economy had been realized. while total inflation had moderated over the past year, core inflation had not shown a sustained easing since the beginning of the year. with inflation well above the committee’s longer-run 2 percent objective, participants expected that a period of below-trend growth in real gdp and some softening in labor market conditions would be needed to bring aggregate supply and aggregate demand into better balance and reduce inflationary pressures sufficiently to return inflation to 2 percent over time. participants generally noted that banking stresses had receded and conditions in the banking sector were much improved since early march. participants generally continued to judge that a tightening in credit conditions spurred by banking-sector stress earlier in the year would likely weigh further on economic activity, but the extent remained uncertain. several participants mentioned that credit conditions had not appeared to have tightened significantly beyond what would be expected in response to the monetary policy actions taken since early last year. some participants judged that it was still too early to assess with confidence the eventual effects of tighter bank credit conditions on economic activity and noted that it would be important to monitor closely the potential effects of banking-sector developments on credit conditions and economic activity. in their discussion of the household sector, participants generally noted that consumer spending so far this year had been stronger than expected. several participants noted that aggregate household wealth remained high, as equity and home prices had not declined much from their recent highs. a few participants mentioned that while, overall, the household sector still retained much of the excess savings it had accumulated during the pandemic, there were signs that consumers were facing increasingly tighter budget constraints, given high inflation and, especially for low-income households, depleted savings. regarding the business sector, various participants said that reports from their contacts were mixed, with some pointing to softening economic conditions and others indicating greater-than-expected strength. many participants noted that developments in the banking sector appeared to have had only a modest effect so far on credit availability for firms. some participants remarked that the effect of high interest rates on the housing sector appeared to be bottoming out, with home sales, builder sentiment, and new construction all having improved a little since the start of the year. in their discussion of economic activity, several participants pointed out that recent gdp readings had been stronger than expected earlier in the year, while gross domestic income (gdi) readings had been weak. of those who noted the discrepancy between gdp and gdi, most suggested that economic momentum may not be as strong as indicated by the gdp readings. in discussing that possibility, a couple of these participants also cited the recent subdued growth in aggregate hours worked. participants noted that labor market conditions remained very tight, with robust payroll gains and the unemployment rate still near historically low levels. nevertheless, they noted some signs that supply and demand in the labor market were coming into better balance, with the prime-age labor force participation rate moving up in recent months and further reductions in rates of job openings and quits, and declines in average weekly hours. a couple of participants conveyed that they heard at a recent fed listens event that, in various parts of the country, the lack of affordable housing in the area was preventing some lower-income workers from relocating to accept jobs. similarly, a few participants noted that their district contacts reported less difficulty in hiring and retaining workers, lower turnover rates, and some layoffs. some participants pointed out that payroll gains had remained robust but noted that some other measures of employment—such as those based on the bureau of labor statistics’ household survey, the quarterly census of employment and wages, or the board staff’s measure of private employment using data from the payroll processing firm adp—suggested that job growth may have been weaker than indicated by payroll employment. participants anticipated that employment growth would likely slow further, consistent with their projections of below-trend economic growth. participants noted that nominal wage growth had shown signs of easing but observed that it was still running at a pace that, given current estimates of trend productivity growth, was above what would be consistent over the page 8 federal open market committee  longer run with the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. participants expected supply and demand conditions in the labor market to come into better balance over time, easing pressures on wages and prices. participants agreed that inflation was unacceptably high and noted that the data, including the cpi for may, indicated that declines in inflation had been slower than they had expected. participants observed that although core goods inflation had moderated since the middle of last year, it had slowed less rapidly than expected in recent months, despite data and reports from business contacts indicating that supply chain constraints had continued to ease. some participants noted the recent moderation in housing services inflation and expected this trend to continue. however, a few participants pointed to upside risks to the outlook for housing services inflation associated with near-record low inventories of homes for sale, solid housing demand, and less-than-expected deceleration recently in measures of rents for leases signed by new tenants. additionally, some participants remarked that core nonhousing services inflation had shown few signs of slowing in the past few months. several participants noted that longer-term measures of inflation expectations from surveys of households and businesses remained well anchored. participants emphasized that, with appropriate firming of monetary policy, well-anchored longer-term inflation expectations would support a return of inflation to the committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal over time. participants generally noted a high degree of uncertainty regarding the cumulative effects on the economy from both already-enacted monetary policy tightening and the potential additional tightening in credit conditions stemming from recent banking-sector developments. participants noted that the full effects of monetary tightening had likely yet to be observed, though several highlighted the possibility that much of the effect of past monetary policy tightening may have already been realized. regarding downside risks to economic activity, participants noted the possibility that the cumulative and rapid tightening of monetary policy would eventually affect economic activity more than expected, and that the additional effects of the tightening of bank credit conditions could prove more substantial than anticipated. regarding risks to inflation, with inflation remaining well above the committee’s longer-run goal, some participants mentioned the possibility that longer-term inflation expectations could become unanchored, particularly in light of stronger-than-expected consumer demand and a still-tight labor market. several participants cited the possibility of delayed effects of tighter credit conditions potentially contributing to a slowdown in economic activity that reduces inflationary pressures. in their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants concurred that while inflation had moderated since the middle of 2022, it remained well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. economic activity had continued to expand at a modest pace. the labor market remained very tight, with robust job gains in recent months and the unemployment rate still low, but there were some signs that supply and demand in the labor market were coming into better balance. the economy was facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions, including higher interest rates, for households and businesses, which would likely weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, although the extent of these effect remained uncertain. against this backdrop, and in consideration of the significant cumulative tightening in the stance of monetary policy and the lags with which policy affects economic activity and inflation, almost all participants judged it appropriate or acceptable to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 to 5¼ percent at this meeting. most of these participants observed that leaving the target range unchanged at this meeting would allow them more time to assess the economy’s progress toward the committee’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. some participants indicated that they favored raising the target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting or that they could have supported such a proposal. the participants favoring a 25 basis point increase noted that the labor market remained very tight, momentum in economic activity had been stronger than earlier anticipated, and there were few clear signs that inflation was on a path to return to the committee’s 2 percent objective over time. all participants agreed that it was appropriate to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in its previously announced plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. in discussing the policy outlook, all participants continued to anticipate that, with inflation still well above the committee’s 2 percent goal and the labor market remaining very tight, maintaining a restrictive stance for monetary policy would be appropriate to achieve the committee’s objectives. almost all participants noted that in their economic projections that they judged that additional increases in the target federal funds rate during 2023 would be appropriate. most participants observed that uncertainty about the outlook for the economy and inflation remained elevated and that additional minutes of the meeting of june 13–14, 2023 page 9  information would be valuable for considering the appropriate stance of monetary policy. many also noted that, after rapidly tightening the stance of monetary policy last year, the committee had slowed the pace of tightening and that a further moderation in the pace of policy firming was appropriate in order to provide additional time to observe the effects of cumulative tightening and assess their implications for policy. participants agreed that their policy decisions at every meeting would continue to be based on the totality of incoming information and its implications for the economic outlook as well as the balance of risks. they also emphasized the importance of communicating to the public their datadependent approach. most participants observed that postmeeting communications, including the sep, would help clarify their assessment regarding the stance of monetary policy that is likely to be appropriate to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. participants also discussed several risk-management considerations that could bear on future policy decisions. almost all participants stated that, with inflation still well above the committee’s longer-run goal and the labor market remaining tight, upside risks to the inflation outlook or the possibility that persistently high inflation might cause inflation expectations to become unanchored remained key factors shaping the policy outlook. even though economic activity had been resilient recently and that the labor market remained strong, some participants commented that there continued to be downside risks to economic growth and upside risks to unemployment. despite the receding of the stresses in the banking sector, some participants commented that it would be important to monitor whether developments in the banking sector lead to further tightening of credit conditions and weigh on economic activity. some participants noted concerns about the potential risks stemming from weakness in commercial real estate. a number of participants observed that the resolution of the federal government debt limit had removed one source of significant uncertainty for the economic outlook. a few participants noted that there could be some upward pressure on money market rates in the near term as the treasury issued more bills to meet expenditures and return the balance in the tga to the treasury’s preferred level. those participants observed that upward pressure on money market rates relative to the rate offered on the on rrp facility could lead to a decline in usage of the facility. committee policy actions in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had continued to expand at a modest pace. they also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation had remained elevated. members concurred that the u.s. banking system was sound and resilient. they also agreed that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. members agreed that the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 to 5¼ percent. members agreed that holding the target range steady at this meeting allowed the committee to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, members concurred that they will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, members agreed that the committee will continue to reduce the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. all members affirmed that they are strongly committed to returning inflation to their 2 percent objective. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the system open market account in accordance with the page 10 federal open market committee  following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective june 15, 2023, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 5 to 5¼ percent. • conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. • conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 5.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day. • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a modest pace. job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated. the u.s. banking system is sound and resilient. tighter credit conditions for households and businesses are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. the extent of these effects remains uncertain. the committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5 to 5¼ percent. holding the target range steady at this meeting allows the committee to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities, as described in its previously announced plans. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lisa d. cook, austan d. goolsbee, patrick harker, philip n. jefferson, neel kashkari, lorie k. logan, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 5.15 percent, effective june 15, 2023. the board also voted unanimously to minutes of the meeting of june 13–14, 2023 page 11  approve the establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 5.25 percent. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, july 25–26, 2023. the meeting adjourned at 10:20 a.m. on june 14, 2023. notation vote by notation vote completed on may 23, 2023, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on may 2–3, 2023.  joshua gallin secretary 
uly 26, 2023 chair powell. good afternoon. my colleagues and i remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. we understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. price stability is the responsibility of the federal reserve. without price stability, the economy doesn’t work for anyone. in particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. since early last year, the fomc has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. today we took another step by raising our policy interest rate ¼ percentage point, and we are continuing to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. we’ve covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. looking ahead, we will continue to take a data-dependent approach in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate. i’ll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace. growth in consumer spending appears to have slowed from earlier in the year. although activity in the housing sector has picked up somewhat, it remains well below levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. and higher interest rates and slower output growth also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. the labor market remains very tight. over the past three months, job gains averaged 244,000 jobs per month, a pace below that seen earlier in the year but still a strong pace. the unemployment rate remains low at 3.6 percent. there are some continuing signs that supply and  demand in the labor market are coming into better balance. the labor force participation rate has moved up since last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. while the jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still substantially exceeds the supply of available workers. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. over the 12 months ending in may, total pce prices rose 3.8 percent; excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 4.6 percent. in june, the 12-month change in the consumer price index, or cpi, came in at 3.0 percent, and the change in the core, core cpi, was 4.8 percent. inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year. nonetheless, the process of getting inflation back down to 2 percent has a long way to go. despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant—significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we’re highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. at today’s meeting, the committee raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point, bringing the target range to 5¼ to 5½ percent. we are also continuing the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. with today’s action, we’ve raised our  policy rate by 5¼ percentage points since early last year. we have been seeing the effects of our policy tightening on demand in the most interest rate–sensitive sectors of the economy, particularly housing and investment. it will take time, however, for the full effects of our ongoing monetary restraint to be realized, especially on inflation. in addition, the economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses, which are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks. we remain committed to bringing inflation back to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you, and i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. steve.  steve liesman. mr. chairman, thank you. you have, i think a couple of times in your opening remarks, talked about this language “in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate.” should we take that to mean that additional hikes are likely on the way? and should we also believe that all future meetings—say, september and november— are live, or are you in an every-other-meeting mode? thank you. chair powell. so we haven’t made a decision to go to every other meeting. it’s not something we’ve looked at. we’re going to be going meeting by meeting, and as we go into each meeting, we’re going to be asking ourselves the same questions. so we haven’t made any decisions about, about any future meetings, including the pace at which we’d consider hiking. but we’re going to be assessing the need for further tightening that may be appropriate—you read the language—“to return inflation to 2 percent over time.” i would say that the intermeeting data came in broadly in line with expectations: economic activity remained resilient, job creation remains strong while cooling a bit, and the june cpi report actually came in a bit better than expectations for a change. and the june cpi report, of course, was welcomed, but it’s only one report, one month’s data. we hope that inflation will follow a lower path, as was—that will be consistent with the cpi reading, but we don’t know that, and we’re just going to need to see more data. so, what are we going to be looking at? really, it will be the broader, the whole broader picture, and starting with—we’re looking for moderate growth, right? we’re looking for supply and demand through the economy coming into better balance, including, in particular, in the labor market. we’ll be looking at inflation. we’ll be asking ourselves, does this whole collection of data, do we assess it as suggesting that we need to raise rates further? and if we make that conclusion, then we will go ahead and raise rates. so that’s how we’re thinking about  the next meeting and, you know, how we’re thinking about meetings going forward potentially, but, you know, we’re now mainly thinking about the next meeting. i will also say, since we’re talking about it, between now and the september meeting, we get two more job reports, two more cpi reports. i think we have an eci report coming later this week—which is [an] employment compensation index—and lots of data on economic activity. all of that information is going to inform our decision as we go into that meeting. i would say it is certainly possible that we would raise funds again at the september meeting if the data warrant it, and i would also say it’s possible that we would choose to hold steady at that meeting. we’re going to be making careful assessments, as i said, meeting by meeting, and i’ll close by saying we’ve raised the federal funds rate now by 525 basis points since march 2022. monetary policy, we believe, is restrictive and is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. steve liesman. if i could just briefly follow up on something you said there: you said the data in the intermeeting period, it probably came in in line with expectations. does that mean there’s unlikely to have been a change in the overwhelming outlook of the committee that two more hikes are necessary? chair powell. i’m just going to go back to what i said. we, we—you know, that’s the question. we have eight weeks now until the september meeting, and all that data that i recited, we’re going to be looking at all that and making that assessment then. and it really—we did have the one good reading, and, of course, we welcome that. but it’s just one reading, as everybody knows. and, and, you know, we’ve seen—we’ve seen this before in the data. many forecasts call for, for rates—for, for inflation to remain low, but we just don’t know that until we see the data. so we’ll be focusing on that. michelle smith. jeanna.  jeanna smialek. thank you. thanks for taking our questions, chair powell. obviously, you updated the language around growth in the statement today. you know, we’ve seen the barbie movie numbers. we’ve seen everyone going to taylor swift concerts this summer. it seems like the american consumers are in pretty good shape, and it does seem like growth is sort of picking back up a little bit or at least doing well. and i wonder, from your perspective, if that continues, if we see growth not just stabilizing but doing, you know, performing well this summer, is that a problem because it’s inflationary, or is it good news because it suggests that a soft landing is more likely? just how are you thinking about that sort of trajectory? chair powell. yeah. so i would say it this way: the overall resilience of the economy, the fact that, that we’ve been able to achieve disinflation so far without any meaningful negative impact on the labor market, the strength of the economy—overall, that’s a good thing. it’s good to see that, of course. it’s also—you see consumer, consumer confidence coming up and things like that. that will support activity going forward. but you’re, you’re right, though. at the margin, stronger growth could lead, over time, to higher inflation, and that would require an appropriate response for monetary policy. so we’ll be watching that carefully and seeing how it evolves over time. michele smith. neil. neil irwin. thanks, chair powell. neil irwin from axios. so, as you referenced earlier, in the intermeeting period, soft cpi, jobs reports still strong but moderating, jolts look good. so if you’re data dependent, why not pause again? why not stay on hold? why not take another meeting off when the data was at least cutting in the direction you want to see?  chair powell. so if you go back to what we’re trying to do here, we’re trying to achieve a stance of policy that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent. at the last meeting, we wrote down our individual estimates of that would take—of what that would take, and the median of that was, was an additional two rate hikes. so i would say, we looked at the interim intermeeting data and, as i mentioned, broadly consistent, not perfectly consistent, but broadly consistent with expectations. and, as a result, we went ahead and, and took another step. and that’s, you know, a labor market that continues to be strong but, but gradually slowing. i mentioned that the inflation report was actually a little better than expected, but, you know, we’re, we’re going to be careful about taking too much signal from, from a single reading. and, you know, growth came in stronger than expected. so that’s how we look at it, and, and so we did take that step today. michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. chair powell, markets widely believe the median fomc participant’s inflation forecast from june for the fourth quarter of this year will be too high, given autos and shelter, and that by september, that may warrant a downward revision in the inflation forecast of 20 to 30 basis points. would that type of inflation progress be enough to hold rates steady from here, or do you need to see below-trend growth and decelerating labor income growth to be convinced that you’ve done enough? chair powell. so it’s hard to pick the pieces apart and say, you know, how much of this and how much of that. you know, we’ll be looking at everything. and, you know, we’ll, of course, we’ll be looking to see whether the signal from june’s cpi is replicated or, or the opposite of replicated or whether it’s somewhere in the middle. we’ll be looking at the growth data. we’ll be looking at the labor market data very closely, of course, and making an overall  judgment about that. it’s the totality of the data, i think, but with a particular focus on, on making progress on inflation. nick timiraos. if i could follow up: last month you said there were benefits to moderating the pace of increases because it would give you more information to make decisions. would another cpi report like the one we just had in june allow you to at least maintain that slower pace and defer until the fall any decision on whether you need that second rate hike? chair powell. so i’m just going to tell you again what we’re going to do. in september, we’re going to look at, at two additional job reports, two additional cpi reports, lots of activity data, and that’s what we’re going to look at, and we’re going to make that decision then. and that decision could, could mean another hike in, in september, or it could mean that we decide to maintain at that level. and, again, the question we’re going to be asking ourselves is, is the overall signal one that we need to do more, that we need to tighten further? and if we get that signal, whenever we get it, then—and that’s the collective judgment of the committee— then we will move ahead. if we don’t, you know, then, then we’ll have the option of maintaining policy at that level, but it’s, it’s, you know, it’s really dependent so much on the data, and we just don’t have it yet. michelle smith. chris. christopher rugaber. hi. chris rugaber at associated press. so consumer confidence in the economy is rising, likely in large part because of, of the declines in headline inflation. you also see wages are also rising faster than prices now after trailing them for a long time. how much are americans truly harmed by inflation at its current level, headline level of 3 percent? and with that in mind, when do you put some weight back on the employment side of the dual mandate?  chair powell. so i guess i’d say it this way: first, it is—it is a good thing that headline inflation has come down so much, because that’s really what the public experiences. and, and i would say that having headline inflation move down that much almost creates a—it will strengthen the broad sense that, that the public has that inflation is coming down, which will in turn, we hope, help inflation continue to move down. so you are really—sorry, your question was? christopher rugaber. well, i mean, you’ve talked for many press conferences now about the harm created by inflation, how hard it is for people. so how much of that are we still seeing with inflation now down at 3 [percent]? chair powell. so i guess i would put it this way. we, we—i’d say it this way: it’s really a question of, how do you balance the two risks, the risk of doing too much or doing too little? and, you know, i would say that, you know, we’re coming to a place where, where there really are risks on both sides. it’s hard to say exactly whether, whether they’re in balance or not, but as our—as our stance has become more restrictive and inflation moderates, we do increasingly face that risk. but, you know, we, we need to see that inflation is durably down that far, you know. as you know, we think, and most economists think, that core inflation is actually a better signal of, of where headline inflation is going, because headline inflation is affected greatly by volatile energy and food prices. so we would want core inflation to be coming down, because that’s what we think—that’s—core is signaling where headline is going to go in the future. and core inflation is still pretty elevated, you know? there’s reason to think it can come down now, but it’s, it’s still quite elevated, and so we think we need to stay on task, and we think we’re  going to need to hold, certainly, hold policy at a restrictive level for some time. and we need to be prepared to raise further if that—if we think that’s appropriate. christopher rugaber. well, and then if inflation were to—just a quick follow[up]: if it stays at 3 or drops even a little bit more, i mean, how much of an increase in unemployment do you think is acceptable to get that last bit of inflation? people are talking about the potential difficulty of the last, so-called last mile of inflation. so—but how much? again, how much unemployment do you think is justified to get down that last one— chair powell. so it is—it is a very positive thing that, actually, the unemployment rate is the same as it was when we lifted off in march of ’22, at 3.6 percent. so that’s a real blessing in that we’ve been able to achieve some disinflation, and we don’t seek to it. it’s not that we’re aiming to, to raise unemployment, but i would just say, the historical record—we have to be honest about the historical record, which does suggest that when central banks go in and slow the economy to bring down inflation, the result tends to be some softening in labor market conditions. and so that is still the, the likely outcome here. and, you know, we hope that that’s as little as possible, but we have to be honest that that is—that is the likely outcome. the worst outcome for everyone, of course, would be not to deal with inflation now, not get it done. whatever the short-term social costs of getting inflation under control, the longer- term social costs of failing to do so are greater, and the historical record is very, very clear on that. if you go through a period where inflation expectations are not anchored, inflation is volatile, it interferes with people’s lives and with economic activity, and, you know, that’s the— that’s the thing we, we really need to avoid and will avoid. michelle smith. let’s go to michael mckee.  michael mckee. at this point, you say the policy is restrictive, but all year long we have seen growth surprise to the upside, unemployment to the downside, and inflation, lately, to the downside. so i’m wondering, by definition, should you be restrictive enough right now under these conditions? do you think you might need to do more, because i’m curious about what you see as inflation dynamics now? is the economy still moving in a direction where it creates more inflation? people talk about base effects and higher energy costs, and now we have some large labor settlements. or is the economy disinflating, and you’re just, you’re able to go back to the old fed policy of opportunistic disinflation? chair powell. so i’ll just say again, the broader picture of what we want to see is, we want to see easing of supply constraints and normalization of pandemic-related distortions to demand and supply. we want to see economic growth running at moderate or modest levels to help ease inflationary pressures. we want to see continued restoration of supply and demand balance, particularly in the labor market. and all of that should lead to declining inflationary pressures. now what we see is, we see those pieces of the puzzle coming together. and we’re seeing evidence of those things now, but i would—i would say that what, what our eyes are telling us is that policy has not been restrictive long, restrictive enough for long enough to have its full desired effects. so we intend, again, to keep policy restrictive until we’re confident that inflation is coming down sustainably to our 2 percent target, and we’re prepared to further tighten if that is appropriate. and we think the process, you know, still probably has a, a long way to go. michael mckee. well, do you think under current conditions you are restrictive enough unless something changes?  chair powell. well, i think—we think, you know, today’s rate hike was appropriate, and i think we’re going to be looking at the incoming data to inform our decision at the next meeting about, is the incoming data telling us that we need to do more? and if it does tell us that—collectively, if that’s our view—then we will do more. michelle smith. colby. colby smith. thank you. colby smith with the financial times. if september is, in fact, a live meeting, how does that square with the need for a more gradual tightening pace that you spoke of last month in explaining the rationale for holding the funds rate steady at the june meeting? chair powell. so a more gradual pace doesn’t go immediately to [moving] every other meeting. it could be two out of three meetings, right? it could be—it just means if you’re slowing down, the point really was to slow down the decision cycle as, as we get closer and closer to, we think, our destination. and i wouldn’t want to go automatically to [moving] every other meeting, because i just don’t think that’s—we don’t—i think it’s not an environment where we want to provide a lot of forward guidance. there’s a lot of uncertainty out there. we just want to keep moving at what we think is the right pace, and i do think it makes all the sense in the world to slow down as we now make these finely judged decisions, and so that’s what we did. and so i, i think it’s possible. i mentioned it before. it’s possible that we would move at consecutive meetings—we’re not taking that off the table—or we might not. it’s really going to depend on what the data tell us. that’s the best we can do. colby smith. so we shouldn’t assume that every other meeting is the lowest tightening frequency, let’s say? it could be, you know, longer intervals in between as well?  chair powell. i think we’re—look, i think we’re going to—we’re going to make a decision about the next meeting, and then we’re going to make a decision about the one after that. and i think it’ll sort itself out. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. thanks. howard schneider with reuters. so, among your colleagues, there have been people who’ve said they feel that very little transmission has taken place so far from monetary policy into the economy, and there are those who feel, they say, it’s happened very fast this time, and it’s kind of up to date. where are you on that continuum? chair powell. so there’s a long-running debate about the lags between changes in financial conditions and the response to those changes from economic activity and inflation, right? so we know that in the modern era, financial conditions move in anticipation of our decisions, and that has clearly been the case in this cycle. so, in a sense, the clock starts earlier than it—than it used to. but that doesn’t necessarily change the process from that point on, and it’s not clear that it has. we also—this is—i’ll tell you what we know and then what we don’t know. we know that financial conditions affect economic activity and inflation with a lag that can be long and variable, or lags, plural, that can be long and variable—a lot of uncertainty around the length of the lags. and, by the way, that’s just one component of the broader uncertainty that we face. so i’ll tell you how i—how i think about this. first, the first thing to say is, we’re determined to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, and we will use our tools to do that. no one should doubt that. i would look at it this way, though. the real federal funds rate is now in meaningfully positive territory. if you take the nominal federal funds rate, subtract the mainstream estimate of near-term inflation expectations, you get a real federal funds rate that is  well above most estimates of the longer-term neutral rate. so i would say, monetary policy is restrictive, more so after today’s decision, meaning that it is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. we’ll keep monetary policy restrictive until we think it’s not appropriate to do so. so that’s how i think about it. i mean, if i sum it up, i would say: we’ve come a long way. we are resolutely committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent goal over time. inflation has proved, repeatedly, has proved stronger than we and other forecasts—forecasters have expected, and at some point, that may change. we have to be ready to follow the data, and given how far we’ve come, we can afford to be a little patient, as well as resolute, as we let this unfold. howard schneider. on the—on the credit side, i’m wondering if you saw anything in the—in the latest sloos data that made you think you’re getting a quantum of credit contraction beyond what you’d expect. the bank lending data really is—the growth rate’s edging down towards below, heading below zero, which is usually, you know, a recession indicator. chair powell. so i guess that the sloos will come out early next week, and i would just say it’s broadly condition—consistent with what you would expect. you’ve got lending conditions tight and getting a little tighter. you’ve got weak demand, and, you know, it, it gives a picture of pretty tight credit conditions in the economy. i think it’s really hard to tease out whether—how much of that is from this source or that source, but i think what matters is, the overall picture is of tight and tightening lending conditions. and that’s, that’s what the sloos will say. michelle smith. rachel.  rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. rachel siegel from the washington post. thanks for taking our questions. could you break down the reasons why inflation has fallen and what share of that credit you would give to factors that don’t stem directly from rate hikes or that might be within your control at all, like easing supply chains and a drop in energy prices over the past year? chair powell. yeah. so, interesting question. so let me start by saying that the inflation surge that we saw in the pandemic resulted from a collision of elevated demand and, and constrained supply, both of which followed from the unprecedented features of the pandemic and the response from fiscal and monetary policy. and we’ve always expected that the disinflationary process would stem from, both from the normalization of those broad pandemic- related supply and demand conditions and from restrictive, restrictive monetary policy, which would help return the balance between supply and demand by restraining demand. and we think that’s broadly what we’re—what we’re seeing. so to go, break it down a little further: of course, headline inflation has come down sharply from elevated levels as energy and food prices have come down, mostly due to [a] reversal of the effects [on those prices that resulted] from the war in ukraine. and that’s, that’s a good thing, and the public experiences that, as i mentioned earlier. for core inflation, i’d say there also—there has been a role for, for most—for, for both factors, both that i mentioned. clearly, for goods, normalization of supply conditions is playing an important role, as is the reversal, the beginning of the reversal, of spending—back into services and away from goods. and take autos as an example. the combination of an increase in sales and inventories, while, while vehicle inflation has decelerated, points to a substantial role for supply, but there’s  also a role for demand, as, you know, the loans and things like that are more expensive. so they’re both working there. housing services inflation now starts to move down. clearly, higher rates have, have slowed the housing market. you know, i would say, monetary policy is working about as we expect, and we think—we think it’ll play an important role going forward, in particular in nonhousing services, where, really, we think that’s, that’s where the labor market will come in as a very, very important factor. so we think both of those—both of those sources of disinflation are playing an important role. rachel siegel. i see. and just to follow up, do you think that of those two sources, that core will rely more heavily on seeing an impact from rate hikes, or is there a more even split there, too? chair powell. i think monetary policy is going to be important going forward because we, we’re sort of reaping now the benefits of the—of the reversal of some of the very specific pandemic things. we’re seeing that with goods, in particular, with supply chains and shortages moving, and we’re seeing—so i think going forward, monetary policy will be important, particularly in that, in the sector, in the nonhousing services sector. michelle smith. edward. edward lawrence. thank you, chair powell. first, let me compliment your tie, the choice of tie. it’s a good color. so thanks for taking our questions. so the beige book, it said, “input cost pressures remained elevated for services firms but eased notably” for manufacturing sectors. is that an indication that there’s a, a wage inflation pressure? and how do you target pressure on the wage inflation without pushing the economy into a recession? chair powell. so i think that, as it relates to goods, it’s really an indication that supply chains and, and shortages are easing. and so, what was the first part of it?  edward lawrence. so, wage inflation. like, how do you—how do you target wage inflation without pushing an economy into a recession? chair powell. i don’t—i don’t think we’re targeting wage inflation. i think what we’re—what we’re looking for is a broad cooling in labor market conditions. and that’s what we’re seeing. so wages have actually been gradually moving down. they’re still at levels what would—that would be consistent over a long period of time with 2 percent inflation. nonetheless, we’re making progress there. and by so many indicators, labor market demand is cooling. you can—you can look at surveys by workers and businesses who see that. you can look at the quits rate normalizing. you can look at job openings coming down. you can look at just job creation in the, the establishment survey has, you know—it’s still at a high level, but it was at, really, an extraordinarily high level for most of the last two years. so you see cooling, particularly in private sector, in the last, you know, in the last report. so i think we see that, and it’s happening at a gradual pace. so that’s actually not a bad thing, in a sense, because if, if what we see is a labor market, very strong demand for labor, which is really the engine of the economy—people are getting hired, many people going back to work, getting wages, spending money—and that’s really what’s driving the economy but that it’s gradually slowing, it’s gradually cooling, that’s a good prescription for getting where we want to get. edward lawrence. but still we see a push to raise minimum wage. we’re seeing a lot of unions go on strike or threaten strike, and the common thing is, they come out with agreements like big pay increases, like ups, and we have the autoworkers coming up. are you concerned then about a trend of series of big unions, these contracts, pushing wage inflation then?  chair powell. not for us to comment on, on contract negotiations. not our job, not our role. you know, we, we monitor these things, and we’ll keep an eye on them, but, really, that’s something that’s, that’s handled at that level and not— michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi. victoria guida with politico. i wanted to ask about the sep, which suggests that you would cut rates as overall and core pce get to around or under 3 percent. and so i’m wondering, is the level of inflation what’s sort of important there as you think about getting to 2 percent and when you might start cutting rates, or is the speed at which inflation is falling also important? chair powell. i think you’d take both into account. i think you’d take everything into account when you start cutting rates. it would—it would depend on the whole, on a wide range of things. and when, when people are writing down rate cuts next year, you know, it just is a sense that inflation is coming down, and we’re comfortable that it’s coming down, and it’s time to start cutting rates. i think—but i mean, there’s a lot of uncertainty between what happens, you know, in the next meeting cycle, let alone the next year, let alone the year after that. so it’s, it’s hard to say exactly what happens there, what’s motivating people. victoria guida. so if it’s sort of—sort of stubbornly in maybe the high 2s, you wouldn’t necessarily cut rates? chair powell. i’m not going—i’m not saying that at all. i’m not giving you any numerical guidance around that. i’m saying we would—we’d be comfortable cutting rates when we’re comfortable cutting rates, and that won’t be this year, i don’t think. it would be—you know, many people wrote down rate cuts for next year. i think the median was several for next year. and that’s just going to be a judgment that we have to make then, a full year from now,  and it’ll be about how confident we are that inflation is, in fact, coming down to our 2 percent goal. michelle smith. steve. steve matthews. a good part of wall street has become more confident that the fed is going to be able to engineer a soft landing, and they’ve reduced their forecast for a recession. and i’m wondering if the staff has changed its view on the likelihood of a recession being likely and if you personally have changed your view in terms of becoming more confident that you can achieve a soft landing. chair powell. so it’s, it has been my view consistently that we do have a shot, and my base case is that we will be able to achieve inflation moving back down to our target without the kind of really significant downturn that results in high levels of job losses that we’ve seen in some past—in some past instances, many past instances of tightening that look like ours. that’s been my view. that’s, that’s still my view. and i think, you know, that that’s sort of consistent with, with what i see today. so—but it’s a long way from assured, and, and, you know, we have a lot left to go to see that happen. so the staff now has a noticeable slowdown in growth starting later this year in the forecast, but given the resilience of the economy recently, they are no longer forecasting a recession. i just want to note that it’s—that our staff produces its own forecast, which is independent of the forecasts that we as fomc participants produce. having an independent staff forecast as well as the individual participant forecasts is really a strength of our—of our process. there’s just a lot of, i think, constructive diversity of opinion that, that helps us make— informs our deliberations—helps us make, i hope, better decisions.  steve matthews. and is the reason for optimism that inflation has come down and you still have a strong labor market? i mean, does that add to the optimism? chair powell. i wouldn’t use the term “optimism” about this yet. i would—i would say, though, that there’s a pathway, and, yes, that’s, that’s a good way to think about it. we’ve, we’ve seen so far the beginnings of disinflation without any real costs in the labor market. and that’s, that’s a really good thing. i would just also say the historical record suggests that there’s very likely to be some softening in labor market conditions. and consistent with having a soft landing, you would—you would have some softening in labor market conditions, and that’s still likely as we—as we go forward with this process. but it’s a good thing to date that we haven’t— we haven’t really seen that. we’ve seen softening through other—not through unemployment, not through higher unemployment. we’ve seen softening through, you know, job openings coming down part of the way back to more normal levels; the quits rate, so people are not quitting as much; we’ve seen participation—people coming in, and so labor supply has, has improved, which has lowered the temperature in the labor market, which was quite overheated, you know, going back a year or so. so we’re seeing that kind of cooling, and that’s, that’s very healthy, and, you know, we hope it continues. michelle smith. jeff. jeff cox. thank you, mr. chairman. jeff cox from cnbc.com. you and other fed officials in the past have suggested that you don’t need to keep hiking until inflation hits 2 percent, that—as long as you see continued progress. so i’m wondering, how close do you need to get with the inflation numbers coming down? how many months of data do you need to  see that will—that will give you sufficient confidence, and how, how far does this fight need to go before you’re willing to kind of declare victory on it? chair powell. so the idea that we would keep hiking until inflation gets to 2 percent—it would be a prescription [for a policy] of going way past the target. that’s, that’s clearly not the appropriate way to think about it. so, and in fact, if you look at our forecast, we, we—the median participant—and, again, these are forecasting out years, so take them with a grain of salt. but people are cutting rates next year because, because, you know, the federal funds rate is at a restrictive level now. so if we see inflation coming down credibly, sustainably, then we don’t need to be at a restrictive level anymore. we can, you know, we can move back to a—to a neutral level and then below a neutral level at a certain point. i think we would, you know, we would—we, of course, would be very careful about that. we’d really want to be sure that inflation is coming down in a sustainable level. and it’s hard to make—i’m not going to try to make a numerical assessment of when and where that would be. but that’s the way i would think about it, is you’d start—you’d stop raising long before you got to 2 percent inflation, and you’d start cutting before you got to 2 percent inflation, too, because we don’t see ourselves getting to 2 percent inflation until—you know, all the way back to 2—until 2025 or so. michelle smith. jennifer. jennifer schonberger. thank you, chair powell. jennifer schonberger with yahoo finance. it’s been over four months since a handful of regional banks, including silicon valley bank, failed. when you look at credit conditions now, given banc of california’s acquisition of pacwest, does this acquisition suggest the full impact has not been felt, or are you  comfortable saying that we’ve seen most of the ripple effects that may have occurred at this point? and how does this play into your outlook for policy? chair powell. so i don’t want to comment on any particular merger proposal, but i will say, things have settled down for sure out there. deposit flows have stabilized. capital and liquidity remain strong. aggregate bank lending was stable quarter over quarter and is up significantly year over year. banking-sector profits generally are coming in strong this quarter. and, overall, the banking system remains strong and resilient. of course, we’re still watching, you know, the situation carefully and monitoring, you know, monitoring conditions in, in the banking sector. in terms of the, the actual effect on—if you think of a particular set of banks that were, were affected because of their size and business model and things like that, that were more affected by the turmoil in march than others, it’s very hard, as i mentioned; it’s very hard to sort of tease out the effects on this very large economy of ours from them tightening. they may be tightening a little bit more, probably are, than other banks. the sloos has been telling us for more than a year that banking conditions are tightening. that process is ongoing, and that will restrain economic growth. so i think—i think we have to take a step back from “i can’t separate those anymore.” i think—i think, basically, we’re just looking at the overall picture, which is one of tightening credit conditions. and that’s, that’s going to restrain economic activity. it is restraining economic activity. so that’s how i would look at it. jennifer schonberger. and how is that informing your outlook for setting policy?  chair powell. so i think we—that goes—that’s—an expected result of tightening interest rate policy is that—is that bank credit conditions—bank lending conditions would tighten as well. and so the question is, is it more effective this time because of what happened in may? i just don’t think we know that. i think we’re looking at the current data in gdp, and we’re seeing strong spending. we’re seeing a strong economy, and it’s made us confident that we can go ahead and raise interest rates now for the third time since the march events. and i—it seems like the economy is weathering this well, but, of course, we’re watching it carefully and, and expect to continue to do that. michelle smith. megan. megan cassella. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking our questions. megan cassella with barron’s. i wondered on wages if you were at all concerned about any inflationary impact of wages now outpacing inflation, which is likely contributing to the boost in consumer sentiment and the continued strength of the consumer that we’ve been seeing. chair powell. well, [growth in nominal] wages in excess of inflation means [that increases in] real wages are positive. again, that’s a great thing. of course, we want that. we want people to have [gains in] real wages. but we want wages to be going up at a level that’s consistent with, with 2 percent inflation over time. as i mentioned, [increases in] nominal wages have been coming down gradually, and that’s what we want to see. we expect to see more of that. that’s just more of what’s consistent over a longer period of time. we don’t really think that, that wages were an important cause of inflation in the first year or so of the outbreak. but i would say that wages are probably an important issue going forward. labor market conditions broadly are going to be an important part of, of getting inflation back down, and that’s why we think we need some further softening in labor market conditions.  megan cassella. this goes sort of to the balance of risks question, but you mentioned at the start how you’re keeping an eye on consumer activity and whether there might be some sort of a rebound there, and i’m curious what the fed’s explanation would be to families if further interest rate hikes start to hit the labor market—start to, you know, drive that sentiment back down. what’s the message there of, of why you continue to keep rates elevated or to raise them? chair powell. well, you know, we have a job assigned to us by congress to get inflation under control. and we think the, the single most important thing we can do to benefit those very families, especially families at the lower end of the income spectrum, is to get inflation sustainably under control and restore price stability. we think that is the most important thing we can do now, and we’re determined to do that. and i would just point out that the people who are the most hurt by inflation right away are people who are on a low fixed income, who, you know, when you’re talking about travel or, you know, transportation costs, heating costs, clothing, food, things like that, those—if you’re just making it through each month on your paycheck and prices go up, you’re in trouble right away. even middle-class people have some resources and can absorb inflation. people, people on the lower end of the income spectrum have a harder time doing that. so we need—we need to get this done. and, you know, the record is clear that if we—if we take too long or if, if we don’t succeed, that the pain will only be greater. so that’s, that’s how i would explain what we’re doing. michelle smith. simon. simon rabinovitch. thank you, chair powell. simon rabinovitch with the economist. you had said last month that this meeting this week was going to be a live one. in  the event, the market had assigned a, you know, a roughly 99 percent probability to the rate move that you announced today. the decision was, of course, unanimous, and the statement was basically unchanged from last month. so may i ask, you know, to what extent was the meeting actually a live one? was there ever any doubt over the past two days about what the decision was, was actually going to be? chair powell. well, i mean, you could—“was there doubt?” look, i would say there’s a range of views on the committee, and when you see the minutes in three weeks, you’ll see that. there’s a range of views about what we should do at this meeting and what we should do at the next meeting, and it’s a—it’s a process that we go through. many times when we go into a meeting, the decision is not, you know, fundamentally in doubt. nonetheless, we have the meeting, and some—some—some meetings are, you know, less uncertain than others, and i’ll just leave it at that. michelle smith. let’s go to evan. evan ryser. evan ryser, market news international. thank you, chair powell. financial conditions have been loosening at a fairly steady clip in recent weeks—the dollar, the stock market, et cetera. what does that mean for the fed and being sure that inflation will come down to target? chair powell. so we monitor, of course, financial conditions, broad financial conditions. you’re right. it’s the dollar and equities, but—and, you know, we’re, of course, very focused on rates and our own policy. you know, we will—we’re going to use our policy tools to—working through financial conditions—to get inflation under control the implication is, you know, we will do what it takes to get inflation down, and in principle, that, that could mean that if financial conditions get looser, we have to do more. but what tends to happen,  though, is, financial conditions get in and out of alignment with what we’re doing, and, and, ultimately, over time, we get where we need to go. evan ryser. if i could also ask about the sep from june that showed rate cuts—do you expect the fed to cut nominal rates next year while also continuing qt? chair powell. so that, that could happen. the question is, you know, is that consistent with, with—so if you think about both of them as normalization, imagine it’s a world where things are okay, and it’s time to bring rates down from what are restrictive levels to more normal levels. normalization, in the case of, of the balance sheet, would be to reduce qt or to continue it, depending on where you are in the cycle. so they are two independent things. and, you know, really, the active tool of monetary policy is rates. but you can imagine circumstances in which it would be appropriate to have them working in what might be seen to be just different ways. but that wouldn’t be the case. michelle smith. let’s go to kyle. kyle campbell. thanks, chair powell. kyle campbell with american banker. i have a question about the discount window. i’m wondering if, since the bank failures of the spring, if you’ve seen signs that banks have taken more steps to be proactive in assuring that they’re ready to use that facility if they need to and if you have any sort of thoughts on whether policies might be appropriate for making sure that banks sort of test regularly to, to show that they are prepared to use it. thanks. chair powell. so that’s a very important thing. yes. and yes to both sides of that. you know, yes, banks are now working to see that they are ready to use the discount window, and we are strongly encouraging them to do that—banks broadly. we did find, as you know, during the events of march and that, you know, that it’s a little clunkier. it can be a little  clunkier and not as quick as it needs to be sometimes. so why not be in a situation where, where you’re just much more ready in case you—in case you need to access the discount window? michelle smith. let’s go to mark hamrick. mark hamrick. mr. chairman, mark hamrick with bankrate. you’ve talked in the past about getting the housing market back into better balance—excuse me—and also that the market might have bottomed. where do you see that situation in balance, or lack thereof, right now, particularly with the restrained, constrained inventory of existing homes that might otherwise be coming onto market at a time when existing homeowners are reluctant to move and, of course, also all of that happening with the 30-year fixed-rate mortgage still around 7 percent on the heels of fed tightening and with what you’re talking about tightening industry lending standards? are we getting closer to balance or farther away? what’s your sense? chair powell. i think we’ve got a ways to go to get back to balance, really, for the reasons that you talked about. with existing homes, you know, there are many people who have low-rate mortgages, and whereas they might want to sell in a normal situation, they’re not going to because they have such, so much, value in their mortgage, whch means that supply of existing homes is really, really tight, which is keeping prices up. on the other hand, there’s, you know, there’s a lot of supply coming on line now, and, and there are people coming in. a lot of the buyers are, are, you know, first-time buyers coming in, buying at, you know, with these, you know, with these relatively elevated mortgage rates. but i think this will take some time to work through. hopefully, more supply comes on line, and, you know, we, we work through it. we’re still living through the, you know, the aftermath of the—of the pandemic. michelle smith. we’ll go to nancy for the last question.  nancy marshall-genzer. hi, chair powell. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. russia has pulled out of an agreement allowing shipments of grains, safe passage through the black sea, and alternative routes at this point could be closed off. just wondering, how could that contribute to higher food prices and inflation generally, and how closely are you watching that? chair powell. we are watching it, of course, very closely. and you’re right. the withdrawal from the black sea grain initiative does raise concerns about global food security, particularly for poorer countries that import a large share of their food. grain prices did go up on this news, but they remain well below their peaks of last spring. and the moves that we’ve seen so far, i would say, are not expected to make a significant contribution to u.s. inflation. of course, we will be watching that situation carefully. nancy marshall-genzer. so you don’t think it would have a big effect on fed policy at this point? chair powell. doesn’t. you wouldn’t say so looking at what we—what we know now. michelle smith. thank you. chair powell. thanks very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 2  page 2 federal open market committee christine graham, 5 special adviser to the board, division of board members, board paolo a. pesenti, director of monetary policy research, federal reserve bank of new york luca guerrieri, associate director, division of international finance, board damjan pfajar, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board christopher j. gust, associate director, division of monetary affairs, board samuel schulhofer-wohl, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of dallas valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board donald keith sill, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of philadelphia jane e. ihrig, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board nitish ranjan sinha, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board callum jones, senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board dafina stewart, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board michael t. kiley, deputy director, division of financial stability, board gustavo a. suarez, assistant director, division of research and statistics, board david e. lebow, senior associate director, division of research and statistics, board brett takacs, senior communications analyst, division of information technology, board sylvain leduc, director of research, federal reserve bank of san francisco jenny tang, vice president, federal reserve bank of boston andreas lehnert, director, division of financial stability, board willem van zandweghe, assistant vice president, federal reserve bank of cleveland kurt f. lewis, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board annette vissing-jørgensen, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board dan li, assistant director, division of monetary affairs, board jeffrey d. walker,4 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board laura lipscomb, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board david lópez-salido, senior associate director, division of monetary affairs, board ann e. misback, secretary, office of the secretary, board juan m. morelli, economist, division of monetary affairs, board norman j. morin, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board michelle m. neal, head of markets, federal reserve bank of new york edward nelson, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board attended through the discussion of the economic and financial situation. 5 paul r. wood, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board rebecca zarutskie, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. market participants interpreted data releases as generally demonstrating economic resilience and a further easing of inflation pressures. the market-implied peak for the federal funds rate rose in response to data pointing to a robust economy but retraced part of that move after the june consumer price index (cpi) release was interpreted by market participants as softer than anticipated. even as market prices shifted to indicate a slightly more re-  minutes of the meeting of july 25–26, 2023 page 3 strictive expected policy path, broader financial conditions eased a bit, reflecting in large part gains in equity prices and tighter credit spreads. notably, share prices for bank equity also appreciated over the intermeeting period as concerns about the banking sector continued to dissipate. spot and forward measures of inflation compensation based on treasury inflation-protected securities were little changed over the intermeeting period at levels broadly consistent with the committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term survey- and market-based measures continued to point to inflation expectations being firmly anchored. market-implied peak policy rates in most advanced foreign economies (afes) rose further this period, and the dollar depreciated modestly. respondents to the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants in july continued to place significant probability of a recession occurring by the end of 2024. however, the timing of a recession expected by survey respondents was again pushed later, and the probability of avoiding a recession through 2024 grew noticeably. survey respondents anticipated that both headline and core personal consumption expenditures (pce) inflation will decline to 2 percent by the end of 2025. there was a strong anticipation, evident in both marketbased measures and responses to the desk’s surveys, that the committee would raise the target range 25 basis points at the july fomc meeting. most survey respondents had a modal expectation that a july rate hike would be the last of this tightening cycle, although most respondents also perceived that additional monetary policy tightening after the july fomc meeting was possible. as inferred from their responses, survey respondents expected real rates to increase through the first half of 2024 and to remain above their expectations for the long-run neutral levels for a few years. the manager then turned to money market developments and policy implementation. the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility continued to work as intended over the intermeeting period and had been instrumental in providing an effective floor under the federal funds rate and supporting other money market rates; those rates remained stable over the period. following the suspension of the debt ceiling in early june, the treasury department issued securities, notably treasury bills, to replenish the treasury general account (tga). the resulting greater availability of treasury bills, which were priced at rates slightly above the current and expected on rrp rates, induced a net decline in on rrp balances for the period. a further decline in on rrp balances was deemed probable amid sustained projected treasury bill issuance, further reductions in the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet in accordance with the previously announced plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet, and a possible further reduction in policy uncertainty that could incentivize money funds to extend the duration of their portfolios. in the july desk survey of primary dealers, respondents expected lower on rrp balances and higher bank reserves by the end of the year, compared with the june survey. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the information available at the time of the july 25–26 meeting suggested that real gross domestic product (gdp) rose at a moderate pace over the first half of the year. the labor market remained very tight, though the imbalance between demand and supply in the labor market was gradually diminishing. consumer price inflation—as measured by the 12-month percent change in the price index for pce—remained elevated in may, and available information suggested that inflation declined but remained elevated in june. in the second quarter, total nonfarm payroll employment posted its slowest average monthly increase since the recovery began in mid-2020, though payroll gains remained robust compared with those seen before the pandemic. similarly, the private-sector job openings rate, as measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, fell in may to its lowest level since march 2021 but remained well above pre-pandemic levels. the unemployment rate edged down to 3.6 percent in june, while the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio were both unchanged. the unemployment rates for african americans and hispanics, however, both rose and were well above the national average. average hourly earnings rose 4.4 percent over the 12 months ending in june, compared with a yearearlier increase of 5.4 percent. consumer price inflation continued to show signs of easing but remained elevated. total pce price inflation was 3.8 percent over the 12 months ending in may, and core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.6 percent over the same period. the trimmed mean measure  page 4 federal open market committee of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 4.6 percent in may. in june, the 12-month change in the cpi was 3.0 percent, while core cpi inflation was 4.8 percent over the same period. measures of short-term inflation expectations had moved down alongside actual inflation but remained above pre-pandemic levels. in contrast, measures of medium- to longer-term inflation expectations were in the range seen in the decade before the pandemic. available indicators suggested that real gdp rose in the second quarter at a pace similar to the one posted in the first quarter. however, private domestic final purchases—which includes pce, residential investment, and business fixed investment and which often provides a better signal of underlying economic momentum than does gdp—appeared to have decelerated in the second quarter. manufacturing output rose in the second quarter, supported by a robust increase in motor vehicle production. after falling sharply in april, real exports of goods picked up in may, led by higher exports of industrial supplies and automotive products. real goods imports fell, as lower imports of consumer goods and industrial supplies more than offset higher imports of capital goods. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit narrowed, as a sharp decline in nominal imports of goods and services outpaced a decline in exports. the available data suggested that net exports subtracted from u.s. gdp growth in the second quarter. indicators of economic activity, such as purchasing managers indexes (pmis), pointed to a step-down in the pace of foreign growth in the second quarter, reflecting fading of the impetus from china’s reopening, continued anemic growth in europe, some weakening of activity in canada and mexico, as well as weak external demand and the slump in the high-tech industry weighing on many asian economies. incoming data also indicated that global manufacturing activity remained weak during the intermeeting period. foreign headline inflation continued to fall, reflecting, in part, the pass-through of previous declines in commodity prices to retail energy and food prices. core inflation edged down in many countries but generally remained high. in this context, and amid tight labor market conditions, many afe central banks raised policy rates and underscored the need to raise rates further, or hold them at sufficiently restrictive levels, to bring inflation in their countries back to their targets. in contrast, central banks of emerging market economies largely remained on hold, and some indicated that a rate cut is possible at their next meeting. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, market participants interpreted domestic economic data releases as indicating continued resilience of economic activity and some easing of inflationary pressures, and they viewed monetary policy communications as pointing to somewhat more restrictive policy than expected. the market-implied path for the federal funds rate rose modestly, and nominal treasury yields increased somewhat at shorter maturities. meanwhile, broad equity prices increased, and spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed moderately. financing conditions continued to be generally restrictive, and borrowing costs remained elevated. over the intermeeting period, the market-implied path for the federal funds rate rose modestly, while the timing of the path’s slightly higher peak moved a little later, to just after the november meeting. beyond this year, the policy rate path implied by overnight index swap (ois) quotes ended the period modestly higher. yields on treasury securities increased modestly at shorter maturities but only a bit at longer maturities. measures of inflation compensation rose only slightly for near-term and longer maturities. measures of uncertainty about the path of the policy rate derived from interest rate options remained very elevated by historical standards. broad stock price indexes increased and spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed moderately over the intermeeting period. the vix—the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500—edged down and ended the period near the 25th percentile of its historical distribution. bank equity prices increased and outperformed the s&p 500 modestly. stock prices for the largest banks fully recovered from their declines in the immediate wake of the failure of silicon valley bank, while those for regional banks remained below the levels seen in early march. short-term interest rates in the afes increased modestly, on net, over the intermeeting period as foreign central banks continued to raise policy rates and signal the potential for further tightening. increases in yields were tempered, however, by downside surprises to both inflation and pmis from some economies. risk sentiment in foreign markets improved somewhat, with most foreign equity indexes increasing and foreign corporate and emerging market sovereign bond spreads narrowing. the staff’s trade-weighted broad dollar index declined moderately, with the largest moves following releases of  minutes of the meeting of july 25–26, 2023 page 5 weaker-than-expected u.s. labor market data and lowerthan-expected u.s. inflation data. conditions in domestic short-term funding markets remained generally stable over the intermeeting period. spreads in unsecured markets narrowed modestly amid slight increases in ois rates. following the suspension of the debt limit, the treasury department partly replenished the tga via a large net increase in bill issuance. auctions of treasury bills were met with robust demand, as shorter-term bill yields increased relative to other money market rates. money market funds increased their holdings of treasury bills and reduced their investments with the on rrp facility. on rrp take-up declined notably—about $390 billion—over the intermeeting period, reflecting more attractive rates on some alternatives to investing in the on rrp facility. despite reduced on rrp take-up, money funds maintained relatively high asset allocations in overnight repurchase agreement investments amid still-elevated uncertainty about the future path of policy. in domestic credit markets, borrowing costs for businesses, households, and municipalities were little changed over the intermeeting period and remained elevated by historical standards. yields on agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) were little changed. the banking sector’s ability to fund loans to businesses and consumers was generally stable during the intermeeting period. core deposit volumes at both large and other domestic banks held steady at the levels that they reached in early may, after having declined sharply in march and april amid the banking-sector turmoil. banks continued to attract inflows of large time deposits, reflecting higher interest rates offered on new certificates of deposit. meanwhile, wholesale borrowing— which primarily consists of advances from federal home loan banks, loans from the bank term funding program, and other credit extended by the federal reserve—had fallen since may by domestic banks of all sizes, partially reversing the surge at the onset of the bank turmoil in march. credit availability for businesses appeared to tighten somewhat in recent months. credit from capital markets was somewhat subdued but overall remained accessible for larger corporations. issuance of leveraged loans remained limited, reflecting low levels of leveraged buyout and merger and acquisition activity as well as weak investor demand. in the municipal bond market, gross issuance was solid in june, as both refundings and new capital issuance picked up from a somewhat subdued may. commercial and industrial (c&i) loan balances contracted modestly in the second quarter, and commercial real estate (cre) loan growth on banks’ books continued to moderate. in the july senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported having tightened standards and terms on c&i loans to firms of all sizes in the second quarter. the most cited reason for tightening c&i standards and terms continued to be concerns about the economic outlook. banks also reported expecting to tighten c&i standards further over the remainder of the year. the july sloos also indicated that standards across all cre loan categories tightened further in the second quarter and that banks expected to tighten cre standards further over the second half of the year. meanwhile, cmbs issuance picked up a bit in may and then ticked down in june after recording low volumes earlier in the year. credit in the residential mortgage market remained broadly available for high-credit-score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. only modest net percentages of banks in the july sloos reported tightening standards for mortgage loans eligible to be purchased by government-sponsored enterprises, while a moderate net percentage of banks reported expecting to tighten lending standards further for these loans over the second half of the year. meanwhile, the availability of mortgage credit remained tighter for households with lower credit scores, at levels close to those prevailing before the pandemic. banks reported in the sloos that they had tightened standards for certain categories of residential real estate loans to be held on their balance sheets, such as jumbo loans and home equity lines of credit. in addition, banks reported expecting to tighten standards for jumbo loans during the remainder of 2023. conditions remained generally accommodative in consumer credit markets, with credit available for most borrowers. credit card balances increased in the second quarter, though at a somewhat slower pace than in previous months. in the july sloos, banks reported expecting to continue tightening lending standards for credit card loans. overall, the credit quality of most businesses and households remained solid. while there were signs of deterioration in credit quality in some sectors, such as the office segment of cre, delinquency rates generally remained near their pre-pandemic lows. the credit quality  page 6 federal open market committee of c&i and cre loans on banks’ balance sheets remained sound as of the end of the first quarter of 2023. however, in the july sloos, banks frequently cited concerns about the credit quality of both cre and other loans as reasons for expecting to tighten their lending standards over the remainder of the year. aggregate delinquency rates on pools of commercial mortgages backing cmbs increased in may and june. the staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, characterized the financial vulnerabilities of the u.s. financial system as notable. the staff judged that asset valuation pressures remained notable. in particular, measures of valuations in both residential and commercial property markets remained high relative to fundamentals. house prices, while having cooled earlier this year, started to rise again, and price-to-rent ratios remained at elevated levels and near those seen in the mid-2000s. although commercial property prices moved down, developments in the cre sector following the pandemic may have produced a permanent shift away from traditional working patterns. if so, fundamentals in the sector could decline notably and contribute to a deterioration in credit quality. the staff assessed that vulnerabilities associated with household and nonfinancial business leverage remained moderate overall. aggregate household debt growth remained in line with income growth. while nonfinancial businesses remained highly leveraged and thus vulnerable to shocks, firms’ debt growth has been relatively subdued recently, and their ability to service that debt has been quite high, even among lower-rated firms. leverage in the financial sector was characterized as notable. in the banking sector, regulatory risk-based capital ratios showed the system remained well capitalized. however, while the overall banking system retained ample lossbearing capacity, some banks experienced sizable declines in the fair value of their assets as a consequence of rising interest rates. vulnerabilities associated with funding risks were also characterized as notable. although a small number of banks saw notable outflows of deposits late in the first quarter and early in the second quarter, deposit flows later stabilized. staff economic outlook the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the july fomc meeting was stronger than the june projection. since the emergence of stress in the banking sector in mid-march, indicators of spending and real activity had come in stronger than anticipated; as a result, the staff no longer judged that the economy would enter a mild recession toward the end of the year. however, the staff continued to expect that real gdp growth in 2024 and 2025 would run below their estimate of potential output growth, leading to a small increase in the unemployment rate relative to its current level. the staff continued to project that total and core pce price inflation would move lower in coming years. much of the step-down in core inflation was expected to occur over the second half of 2023, with forward-looking indicators pointing to a slowing in the rate of increase of housing services prices and with core nonhousing services prices and core goods prices expected to decelerate over the remainder of 2023. inflation was anticipated to ease further over 2024 as demand–supply imbalances continued to resolve; by 2025, total pce price inflation was expected to be 2.2 percent, and core inflation was expected to be 2.3 percent. the staff continued to judge that the risks to the baseline projection for real activity were tilted to the downside. risks to the staff’s baseline inflation forecast were seen as skewed to the upside, given the possibility that inflation dynamics would prove to be more persistent than expected or that further adverse shocks to supply conditions might occur. moreover, the additional monetary policy tightening that would be necessitated by higher or more persistent inflation represented a downside risk to the projection for real activity. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants noted that economic activity had been expanding at a moderate pace. job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate remained low. inflation remained elevated. participants agreed that the u.s. banking system was sound and resilient. they commented that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. however, participants agreed that the extent of these effects remained uncertain. against this background, the committee remained highly attentive to inflation risks. in assessing the economic outlook, participants noted that real gdp growth had continued to exhibit resilience in the first half of the year and that the economy had been showing considerable momentum. a gradual slowdown in economic activity nevertheless appeared to be in progress, consistent with the restraint placed on demand by the cumulative tightening of monetary policy since early last year and the associated effects on finan-  minutes of the meeting of july 25–26, 2023 page 7 cial conditions. participants remarked on the uncertainty about the lags in the effects of monetary policy on the economy and discussed the extent to which the effects on the economy stemming from the tightening that the committee had undertaken had already materialized. participants commented that monetary policy tightening appeared to be working broadly as intended and that a continued gradual slowing in real gdp growth would help reduce demand–supply imbalances in the economy. participants assessed that the ongoing tightening of credit conditions in the banking sector, as evidenced in the most recent surveys of banks, also would likely weigh on economic activity in coming quarters. participants noted the recent reduction in total and core inflation rates. however, they stressed that inflation remained unacceptably high and that further evidence would be required for them to be confident that inflation was clearly on a path toward the committee’s 2 percent objective. participants continued to view a period of below-trend growth in real gdp and some softening in labor market conditions as needed to bring aggregate supply and aggregate demand into better balance and reduce inflation pressures sufficiently to return inflation to 2 percent over time. participants noted that consumer spending had recently exhibited considerable resilience, underpinned by, in aggregate, strong household balance sheets, robust job and income gains, a low unemployment rate, and rising consumer confidence. nevertheless, tight financial conditions, primarily reflecting the cumulative effect of the committee’s shift to a restrictive policy stance, were expected to contribute to slower growth in consumption in the period ahead. participants cited other factors that were likely leading to, or appeared consistent with, a slowdown in consumption, including the declining stock of excess savings, softening labor market conditions, and increased price sensitivity on the part of customers. some participants observed that recent increases in home prices suggested that the housing sector’s response to monetary policy restraint may have peaked. in their discussion of the business sector, participants cited various improvements in firms’ cost structures. these included better-functioning supply chains, lower input costs, and an increased ability to hire and retain workers. participants also discussed conditions that could lead to higher economic activity—such as leaner inventories and reduced expectations of a sharp economic slowdown—and factors that could lead to lower economic activity—such as continuing economic uncertainty, the vulnerabilities of the cre market, and the ongoing weakness of manufacturing output. participants judged that, over coming quarters, firms would reduce the pace of their investment spending and hiring in response to tight financial conditions and the slowing of economic activity. participants remarked that the labor market continued to be very tight but pointed to signs that demand and supply were coming into better balance. they noted evidence that labor demand was easing—including declines in job openings, lower quits rates, more part-time work, slower growth in hours worked, higher unemployment insurance claims, and more moderate rates of nominal wage growth. in addition, they remarked on indications of increasing labor supply, including a further rise in the prime-age participation rate to a postpandemic high. participants also observed, however, that although growth in payrolls had slowed recently, it continued to exceed values consistent over time with an unchanged unemployment rate, and that nominal wages were still rising at rates above levels assessed to be consistent with the sustained achievement of the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. participants judged that further progress toward a balancing of demand and supply in the labor market was needed, and they expected that additional softening in labor market conditions would take place over time. participants cited a number of tentative signs that inflation pressures could be abating. these signs included some softening in core goods prices, lower online prices, evidence that firms were raising prices by smaller amounts than previously, slower increases in shelter prices, and recent declines in survey estimates of shorterterm inflation expectations and of inflation uncertainty. various participants discussed the continued stability of longer-term inflation expectations at levels consistent with 2 percent inflation over time and the role that the committee’s policy tightening had played in delivering this outcome. nonetheless, several participants commented that significant disinflationary pressures had yet to become apparent in the prices of core services excluding housing. participants observed that, notwithstanding recent favorable developments, inflation remained well above the committee’s 2 percent longer-term objective and that elevated inflation was continuing to harm businesses and households—low-income families in particular. participants stressed that the committee would need to see more data on inflation and further signs that aggregate demand and aggregate supply were moving into better balance to be confident that inflation pressures were  page 8 federal open market committee abating and that inflation was on course to return to 2 percent over time. participants generally noted a high degree of uncertainty regarding the cumulative effects on the economy of past monetary policy tightening. participants cited upside risks to inflation, including those associated with scenarios in which recent supply chain improvements and favorable commodity price trends did not continue or in which aggregate demand failed to slow by an amount sufficient to restore price stability over time, possibly leading to more persistent elevated inflation or an unanchoring of inflation expectations. in discussing downside risks to economic activity and inflation, participants considered the possibility that the cumulative tightening of monetary policy could lead to a sharper slowdown in the economy than expected, as well as the possibility that the effects of the tightening of bank credit conditions could prove more substantial than anticipated. in their discussion of financial stability, participants observed that the banking system was sound and resilient and that banking stress had calmed in recent months. participants also noted that the most recent stress-test results indicated that large banks appeared to be well positioned to withstand a severe recession. various participants commented on risks that could affect some banks, including unrealized losses on assets resulting from rising interest rates, significant reliance on uninsured deposits, and increased funding costs. participants also commented on risks associated with a potential sharp decline in cre valuations that could adversely affect some banks and other financial institutions, such as insurance companies, that are heavily exposed to cre. several participants noted the susceptibility of some nonbank financial institutions, such as money market funds or digital asset entities, to runs or instability. in addition, several participants emphasized the need for banks to establish readiness to use federal reserve liquidity facilities and for the federal reserve to ensure its own readiness to provide liquidity during periods of stress. in their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants concurred that economic activity had been expanding at a moderate pace. the labor market remained very tight, with robust job gains in recent months and the unemployment rate still low, but there were continuing signs that supply and demand in the labor market were coming into better balance. participants also noted that tighter credit conditions facing households and businesses were a source of headwinds for the economy and would likely weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. however, the extent of these effects remained uncertain. although inflation had moderated since the middle of last year, it remained well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent, and participants remained resolute in their commitment to bring inflation down to the committee’s 2 percent objective. amid these economic conditions, almost all participants judged it appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 5¼ to 5½ percent at this meeting. participants noted that this action would put the stance of monetary policy further into restrictive territory, consistent with reducing demand–supply imbalances in the economy and helping to restore price stability. a couple of participants indicated that they favored leaving the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged or that they could have supported such a proposal. they judged that maintaining the current degree of restrictiveness at this time would likely result in further progress toward the committee’s goals while allowing the committee time to further evaluate this progress. all participants agreed that it was appropriate to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in its previously announced plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. a number of participants noted that balance sheet runoff need not end when the committee eventually begins to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate. in discussing the policy outlook, participants continued to judge that it was critical that the stance of monetary policy be sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective over time. they noted that uncertainty about the economic outlook remained elevated and agreed that policy decisions at future meetings should depend on the totality of the incoming information and its implications for the economic outlook and inflation as well as for the balance of risks. participants expected that the data arriving in coming months would help clarify the extent to which the disinflation process was continuing and product and labor markets were reaching a better balance between demand and supply. this information would be valuable in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time. participants also emphasized the importance of communicating as clearly as possible about the committee’s datadependent approach to policy and its firm commitment to bring inflation down to its 2 percent objective. participants discussed several risk-management considerations that could bear on future policy decisions. with inflation still well above the committee’s longer-run goal  minutes of the meeting of july 25–26, 2023 page 9 and the labor market remaining tight, most participants continued to see significant upside risks to inflation, which could require further tightening of monetary policy. some participants commented that even though economic activity had been resilient and the labor market had remained strong, there continued to be downside risks to economic activity and upside risks to the unemployment rate; these included the possibility that the macroeconomic effects of the tightening in financial conditions since the beginning of last year could prove more substantial than anticipated. a number of participants judged that, with the stance of monetary policy in restrictive territory, risks to the achievement of the committee’s goals had become more two sided, and it was important that the committee’s decisions balance the risk of an inadvertent overtightening of policy against the cost of an insufficient tightening. committee policy actions in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had been expanding at a moderate pace. they also concurred that job gains had been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation had remained elevated. members concurred that the u.s. banking system was sound and resilient. they also agreed that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. in support of the committee’s objectives to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, members agreed to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 5¼ to 5½ percent. they also agreed that they would continue to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, members concurred that they will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, members agreed to continue to reduce the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. all members affirmed that they are strongly committed to returning inflation to their 2 percent objective. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the system open market account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective july 27, 2023, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 5¼ to 5½ percent. • conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. • conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 5.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day. • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  page 10 federal open market committee • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace. job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated. the u.s. banking system is sound and resilient. tighter credit conditions for households and businesses are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. the extent of these effects remains uncertain. the committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 5¼ to 5½ percent. the committee will continue to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgagebacked securities, as described in its previously announced plans. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor in taking this action, the board approved requests to establish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the federal reserve banks of boston, philadelphia, cleveland, richmond, chicago, st. louis, minneapolis, kansas city, dallas, and san francisco. the vote also encompassed approval by the board of governors of the establishment of a 5.5 percent primary credit rate by the remaining federal reserve banks, 6 the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lisa d. cook, austan d. goolsbee, patrick harker, philip n. jefferson, neel kashkari, lorie k. logan, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. to support the committee’s decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to raise the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 5.4 percent, effective july 27, 2023. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 5.5 percent, effective july 27, 2023. 6 it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, september 19– 20, 2023. the meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on july 26, 2023. notation vote by notation vote completed on july 3, 2023, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on june 13–14, 2023.  joshua gallin secretary effective on the later of july 27, 2023, or the date such reserve banks inform the secretary of the board of such a request. (secretary’s note: subsequently, the federal reserve banks of new york and atlanta were informed of the board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit rate of 5.5 percent, effective july 27, 2023.) 
onference september 20, 2023 chair powell. good afternoon, everyone. my colleagues and i remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. we understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. price stability is the responsibility of the federal reserve. without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. in particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. since early last year, the fomc has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. we have raised our policy interest rate by 5-1/4 percentage points and have continued to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. we have covered a lot of ground, and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. today we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. looking ahead, we are in a position to proceed carefully in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate. our decisions will be based on our ongoing assessments of the incoming data and the evolving outlook and risks. i will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a solid pace, and so far this year, growth in real gdp has come in above expectations. recent readings on consumer spending have been particularly robust. activity in the housing sector has picked up somewhat, though it remains well below levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. higher interest rates also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. in our summary of economic projections, or sep, committee participants revised up their assessments   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary of real gdp growth, with the median for this year now at 2.1 percent. participants expect growth to cool, with the median projection falling to 1.5 percent next year. the labor market remains tight, but supply and demand conditions continue to come into better balance. over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged 150 thousand jobs per month, a strong pace that is nevertheless well below that seen earlier in the year. the unemployment rate ticked up in august but remains low, at 3.8 percent. the labor force participation rate has moved up since late last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years. nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. although the jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. fomc participants expect the rebalancing in the labor market to continue, easing upward pressures on inflation. the median unemployment rate projection in the sep rises from 3.8 percent at the end of this year to 4.1 percent over the next two years. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. based on the consumer price index, or cpi, and other data, we estimate that total pce prices rose 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in august; and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 3.9 percent. inflation has moderated somewhat since the middle of last year, and longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. nevertheless, the process of getting inflation sustainably down to 2 percent has a long way to go. the median projection in the sep for total pce inflation is 3.3 percent this year, falls to 2.5 percent next year, and reaches 2 percent in 2026. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. as i noted earlier, since early last year, we have raised our policy rate by 5-1/4 percentage points. we see the current stance of monetary policy as restrictive, putting downward pressure on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. in addition, the economy is facing headwinds from tighter credit conditions for households and businesses. in light of how far we have come in tightening policy, the committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. we are committed to achieving and sustaining a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to our 2 percent goal over time. in our sep, fomc participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. if the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 5.6 percent at the end of this year, 5.1 percent at the end of 2024, and 3.9 percent at the end of 2025. compared with our june summary of economic projections, the median projection is unrevised for the end of this year but has moved up by 1/2 percentage point at the end of the next two years. these projections, of course, are not a committee decision or plan; if the economy does not evolve as projected, the path for policy will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum employment and price stability goals. we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation as well as the balance of risks. given how far we have come, we are in a position to proceed carefully as we assess the incoming data and the evolving outlook and risks. real interest rates now are well above mainstream estimates of the neutral policy rate, but we are mindful of the inherent uncertainties in precisely gauging the stance of policy. we are prepared to raise rates further if appropriate, and we intend to hold policy at a restrictive level until we are confident that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our objective. in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. we remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-trend growth and some softening of labor market conditions. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. to conclude, we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. thank you, and i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. colby. colby smith. thank you. colby smith with the financial times. what makes the committee inclined to think that the fed funds rate at this level is not yet sufficiently restrictive,   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary especially when officials are forecasting a slightly more benign inflation outlook for this year? there's noted uncertainty about policy lags. headwinds have emerged from the looming government shutdown, the end of federal childcare funding, resumption of student debt payments, things of that nature. chair powell. so i guess i would characterize the situation a little bit differently. so we decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate where it is, at 5.25 percent to 5.5 percent, while continuing to reduce our securities holdings. and we say we're committed to achieving and sustaining a stance of monetary policy that's sufficiently restrictive to bring down inflation to 2 percent over time. we said that. but the fact that we decided to maintain the policy rate at this meeting doesn't mean that we've decided that we have or have not at this time reached that stance of monetary policy that we're seeking. if you look at the sep, as you obviously will have done, you will see that the majority of participants believe that it is more likely than not that it will be appropriate for us to raise rates one more time in the two remaining meetings this year. others believe that we have already reached that. so it's something where we're not making a decision about that question by deciding to just maintain the rate and await further data. colby smith. so right now it's still an open question about sufficiently restrictive. you're not saying today that we've reached this level? chair powell. no. clearly what we decided to do is maintain the policy rate and await further data. we want to see convincing evidence, really, that we have reached the appropriate level, and we're seeing progress, and we welcome that. but we need to see more progress before we'll be willing to reach that conclusion.   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary colby smith. and just on the 2024 projections, what's behind that shallower path for interest rate cuts and the need for real rates to be 50 basis points higher? chair powell. right. so, i would say it this way. first of all, real interest rates are positive now. they're meaningfully positive. and that's a good thing. we need policy to be restrictive so that we can get inflation down to target. okay. and we're going to need that to remain to be the case for some time. so i think, you know, remember that, of course, the sep is not a plan that is negotiated or discussed, really, as a plan. it's accumulation, really, and what you see are the medians. it's accumulation of individual forecasts from 19 people, and then what you're seeing are the medians. so i wouldn't want to bestow upon it the idea that it's really a plan. but what it reflects, though, is that economic activity has been stronger than we expected, stronger than i think everyone expected. and so what you're seeing is this is what people believe, as of now, will be appropriate to achieve what we're looking to achieve, which is progress toward our inflation goal, as you see in the sep. michelle smith. thanks. let's go to rachel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. rachel siegel from the washington post. thanks for taking our questions. how would you characterize the debate around another hike or holding steady? is it discussion around lag times, fear of too much slowing, too little slowing? could you walk us through what this disagreement was about at the meeting? chair powell. yeah, so the proposal at the meeting was to maintain our current policy stance, and i think there was obviously unanimous support for that. but this, of course, is an sep meeting, and so people write down what they think, and you've got some, you saw i think seven wrote down no hike at this meeting or between now and the end of the year, and i   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary think 12 wrote down another single hike in one of the next two meetings that we have between the end of the year. so, it wasn't like we were arguing over that, people just stating their positions. and really what people are saying is let's see how the data come in. you know, we want to see -- you know what we want to see. we want to see that these good inflation readings that we've been seeing for the last three months, we want to see that it's more than just three months, right? we want to see, you know -- the labor market report that we received, the last one that we received was a good example of what we do want to see. it was a combination of, you know, across a broad range of indicators, continuing rebalancing of the labor market. so those are the two things, those are our two mandate variables, and that's the progress that we want to see. but i think people, they want to be convinced, you know, they want to be careful not to jump to a conclusion really one way or the other, but just be convinced that the data, you know, support that conclusion. and that's why, given how far we've come and how quickly we've come, we're actually in a position to be able to proceed carefully as we assess the incoming data and the evolving outlooks and risks and make these decisions meeting by meeting. rachel siegel. and in your view, what would -- i know nothing has been decided yet, but what would one more hike at the end of the year do to the economy or to inflation? and on the other side, what would no hike do, if you could sort of game that out for us? chair powell. so, you know, you can make the argument that one hike one way or the other won't matter, but for us, we're trying, obviously as a group, it's a pretty tight cluster of where we think that policy stance might be, but we're always going to be learning from data. you know, we've learned all through the course of the last year that actually we needed to go further than we had thought. if you go back a year and what we thought, what we wrote down, it's actually gotten higher and higher. so we don't really know until, and that's why, again, we're in a   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary position to proceed carefully at this point. a year ago, we proceeded pretty quickly to get rates up. now we're fairly close, we think, to where we need to get. it's just a question of reaching the right stance. i wouldn't attribute huge importance to one hike in macroeconomic terms. nonetheless, you know, we need to get to a place where we're confident that we have a stance that will bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. that's what we need to get to, and we've been moving toward it. as we've gotten closer to it, we've slowed the pace at which we've moved. i think that was appropriate. and now that we're getting closer, again, we have the ability to proceed carefully. michelle smith. let's go to steve. steve liesman. steve leisman, cnbc. mr. chairman, i want to return to colby's question here. what is it saying about the committee's view of the inflation dynamic in the economy that you achieve the same forecast inflation rate for next year but need another half a point of the funds rate on it? does it tell us that the committee believes inflation to be more persistent, requires more medicine effectively? and i guess a related question is if you're going to project a funds rate above the longer-run rate for four years in a row, at what point do we start to think, hey, maybe the longer rate or the neutral rate is actually higher? thank you. chair powell. so i guess i would point more to -- rather than pointing to a sense of inflation having become more persistent, we've seen inflation be more persistent over the course of the past year, but i wouldn't say that's something that's appeared in the recent data. it's more about stronger economic activity, i would say. so if i had to attribute one thing, again, we're picking medians here and trying to attribute one explanation, but i think broadly stronger economic activity means we have to do more with rates, and that's what that meaning is telling you. in terms of what the neutral rate can be, you know, we know it by its works. we only know   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary it by its works, really. we can’t – we can’t - the models that we use, ultimately you only know when you get there and by the way the economy reacts, and, again, that's another reason why we're moving carefully now because, you know, there are lags here. so it may, of course, be that the neutral rate has risen. you do see people, you don't see the median moving, but you do see people raising their estimates of the neutral rate, and it's certainly plausible that the neutral rate is higher than the longer-run rate. remember, what we write down in the sep is the longer-run rate. it is certainly possible that, you know, that the neutral rate at this moment is higher than that and that that's part of the explanation for why the economy has been more resilient than expected. michelle smith. let's go to howard. howard schneider. howard schneider with reuters. thank you. so you've said several times that the economy needed a period of below-trend growth to get inflation consistently back to 2 percent.you kind of get that in 2024, a little bit, 1.5 percent. it's just a touch below what's the estimate of potential. so the fact that you're getting so much done at so much less cost, does that represent a change in how you think inflation works, a change in how you think the economy works, a change in the mix of supply healing versus demand destruction that's necessary to achieve this? chair powell. yes, of course. it is a good thing that we've seen now meaningful rebalancing in the labor market without an increase in unemployment, and that's because we're seeing that rebalancing in other places. in, for example, job openings and in the jobs worker gap. you're also seeing supply-side things. so that's happening. i would say, though, i still think, and i think broadly, people still think that there will have to be some softening in the labor market that can come through more supply, as we've seen as well. also, remember the natural rate we   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary think is coming down, which is a supply-side thing, so that the gap between any given unemployment rate that's lower than that and the natural rate comes down, that's a way for the labor market to achieve a better balance. so, all of those things are happening. you're right. in the median forecast, we don't see a big increase in unemployment. we do see an increase, but that really is just playing forward the trends that we've been seeing. that is not guaranteed. there may come a time when unemployment goes up more than that, but that's really what we've been seeing is progress without higher unemployment for now. howard schneider. so just to boil that down for a second, you know, we've gone from a very narrow path to a soft landing to something different. would you call the soft landing now a baseline expectation? chair powell. no, no. i would not do that. i would just say -- what would i say about that? i've always thought that the soft landing was a plausible outcome, that there was a path, really, to a soft landing. i've thought that and i've said that since we lifted off. it's also possible that the path is narrowed, and it's widened apparently. ultimately, this may be decided by factors that are outside our control at the end of the day. but i do think it's possible. i also think, you know, this is why we're in a position to move carefully again. we will restore price stability. we know that we have to do that and we know the public depends on us doing that, and we know that we have to do it so that we can achieve the kind of labor market that we all want to achieve, which is an extended period, sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. we know that. the fact that we've come this far lets us really proceed carefully, as i keep saying. so i think, you know, that's the end we're trying to achieve. i wouldn't want to handicap the likelihood of it, though. it's not up to me to do that. michelle smith. nick.   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary nick timiraos. nick timiraos, the wall street journal. chair powell, both you and vice chair williams have indicated that sufficiently restrictive will be judged on a real rather than nominal basis, implying some scope for nominal rate cuts next year provided further compelling evidence that price pressures will continue to subside. is the fomc focused on targeting a real level of policy restriction? and can you explain what would constitute enough evidence that will allow the fomc to normalize the nominal stance of policy while keeping real policy settings sufficiently restrictive? chair powell. i mean, yes, we understand that it's a real rate that will matter and that needs to be sufficiently restrictive. and, again, i would say you know sufficiently restrictive only when you see it. it's not something you can arrive at with confidence in a model or in various estimates, you know. and so what are we seeing? we're seeing, you know, through a combination of the unwinding of the pandemic-related demand and supply distortions and monetary policies work in suppressing demand or alleviating very high demand. the combination of those two things is actually working. you're seeing, you know, inflation coming down. it's principally now in goods, also in housing services. you begin to see effects of it in non-housing services as well. so, i think we think that that is working. and i think, you know, as we've said, we want to reach that. we want to reach something that we're confident gets us to that level. and i think confidence comes from seeing, you know, enough data that you feel like, yes, okay, this feels like we can for now decide that this is the right level and just agree to stay here. we're not permanently deciding not to go higher, but let's say if we get to that level. and then the question is, how long do you stay at that level? and that's a whole other set of questions. for now, the question is trying to find that level where we think we can stay there. and we haven't gotten to a point of confidence about that yet. that's the stage we're at, though.   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary nick timiraos. but it looks like, because there was an across-the-board drop in the core pce projection, core pce inflation projection for this year, and even then it seems possible that core pce inflation could come in even lower than the median at 3.7 percent. would you see a case to raise rates still if it turned out that you were going to achieve the same real rate this year because the decline in inflation proceeds somewhat better than you currently anticipate? chair powell. the decision that we make, you know, at each meeting and certainly at the last two meetings this year, it's going to depend on the totality of all the data. so the inflation data, the labor market data, the growth data, the balance of risks and the other events that are happening out there. we take all of that into account, so i can't really answer a hypothetical about one piece of that. it will be trying to reach a judgment over whether we should move forward with another rate hike overall and whether that would increase our confidence that, yes, this is an appropriate move, and it will help us be more confident that we've gotten to the level that we need to get to. michelle smith. jeanna? jeanna smialek. thanks, chair powell. following up on nick's question, actually, john williams, the new york fed president, obviously, has said things to the effect of next year as we see inflation kind of, again, to nick's point, as we see inflation coming down, we're going to need to reduce interest rates so that we're not squeezing the economy harder and harder over time. and i wonder if that's basically the logic that you apply. is that how you think about it? and then i also wonder, in the last press conference, you said something to the effect of it's a full year out, those discussions, and people interpreted that to mean that you didn't see a possibility of a rate cut in the first half of next year. and i wonder if that was what you meant by that or how you're thinking about that timing.   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary chair powell. so when i answer these questions about hypotheticals about cutting, i'm never intending to send a signal about timing. i'm just answering them as the question is expressed. so please, i wouldn't want to be taken that way. sorry, the first question was, is that how? yeah, so as we go into next year, the question we'll be asking is, you know, taking into account lags and everything else we know about the economy and everything we know about monetary policy, the time will come at some point, and i'm not saying when, that it's appropriate to cut. part of that may be that real rates are rising because inflation is coming down. part of it just may be that it'll be all the factors that we see in the economy. and, you know, that time will certainly come at some point. and what you see is us writing down, you know, a year ahead estimates of what that might be. and, you know, there's so much uncertainty around that. when we're in the moment, we'll do what we think makes sense. no one will look back at this and say, hey, we made a plan. it's not like that at all. these are estimates made a year in advance that are highly uncertain, and that's how it is. michelle smith. neil. neil irwin. thanks so much, chair powell. neil irwin with axios. i wonder, how do you think about the question of whether the strong gdp growth we've been seeing is driven by excess demand versus supply-side factors, productivity, labor force growth? and relatedly, if gdp keeps coming in hot, even in the absence of inflation resurgence, would that on its own be a reason to consider more tightening? chair powell. so on your first question, i mean, we're looking at gdp very, very carefully to try to understand really what's the direction of it, what's driving it. and it's a lot of consumer spending, you know. the consumer's been very robust in spending. so that is, you know, that's how we're looking at it. sorry, your second question was?   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary neil irwin. does gdp stay hot, but without inflation? chair powell. so i think the question will be, gdp is not a mandate, right? maximum employment and price stability are the mandates. the question will be, is the heat that we see in gdp, is it really a threat to our ability to get back to 2 percent inflation? that's going to be the question. it's not a question about gdp on its own. it's, you know, you're expecting to see this improvement, you know, continued rebalancing in the labor market and inflation moving back down to 2 percent in a sustainable way. we have to have confidence in that, and, you know, we'd be looking at gdp just to the extent that it threatens one or both of those. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi, victoria guido with politico. there are multiple external factors that are playing out right now. we see rising oil prices. we see auto workers striking. there's the looming very real possibility of a government shutdown. and i was just wondering, for each of those things, could you talk about how you're thinking about how that might affect the course for the fed and the economy? chair powell. so there is a long list, and you hit some of them. but, you know, it's the strike, it's government shutdown, resumption of student loan payments, higher long-term rates, oil price shock. you know, there are a lot of things that you can look at. and, you know, so what we try to do is assess all of them and handicap all of them. and ultimately, though, there's so much uncertainty around these things. i mean, to start with the strike, first of all, we absolutely don't comment on the strike as we have no view on the strike one way or the other. but we do have to make an assessment of its economic effects to do our jobs. so, you know, the thing about it is so uncertain. it will depend. economic effects, it could affect -- we've looked   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary back at history. it could affect economic output, hiring and inflation. but that's really going to depend on how broad it is and how long it's sustained for. and then it also depends on how quickly production can make up for lost production. so none of those things are known right now. it's very, very hard to know. so you just have to leave that uncertain. and we'll be learning, i think, over the course of the next intermeeting period much more about that. and the same is true for the others. i don't know if you mentioned shutdown. i think of all of these as being on the list. we don't comment on that. it hasn't traditionally had much of a macroeconomic effect. you know, energy prices being higher, that is a significant thing. energy prices being up can affect spending. it can affect spending over time. a sustained period of higher energy prices can affect consumer expectations about inflation. we tend to look through short-term volatility and look at core inflation. but so the question is how long are higher prices sustained. we have to take those macroeconomic effects into account as well. those are some of them. i'm not sure if i hit them all. but, i mean, ultimately, you know, you're coming into this with an economy that appears to have significant momentum. and that's what we start with. but we do have this collection of risks that you mentioned. michelle smith. craig. craig torres. craig torres from bloomberg news. i was a little surprised, chair powell, to hear you say that a soft landing is not a primary objective. this economy is seeing added supply in a way that could create long-term inflation stability. we have prime age labor force participation moving up where people can add skills. workers want to work. we have a boom in manufacturing construction. we've had a decent spate of home building. and since inflation is coming down with strong gdp growth, we may have higher productivity. all are which good for the fed's longer run target of low inflation. and if we lose that in a recession,   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary aren't we opting for the awful hysteresis that we had in 2010? so ,are you taking this into account as you pursue policy? thank you. chair powell. to begin, a soft landing is a primary objective, and i did not say otherwise. i mean, that's what we've been trying to achieve for all this time. the real point, though, is the worst thing we can do is to fail to restore price stability, because the record is clear on that. if you don't restore price stability, inflation comes back, and you can have a long period where the economy is just very uncertain and it will affect growth, it will affect all kinds of things. it can be a miserable period to have inflation constantly coming back and the fed coming in and having to tighten again and again. so the best thing we can do for everyone, we believe, is to restore price stability. i think now, today, we actually have the ability to be careful at this point and move carefully, and that's what we're planning to do. so, we fully appreciate the benefits of being able to continue what we see already, which is rebalancing in the labor market and inflation coming down without seeing an important large increase in unemployment, which has been typical of other tightening cycles. michelle smith. let's go to chris. chris rugaber. hi. thank you. chris rugaber, associated press. when you look at the disinflation that has taken place so far, do you see it mostly as a result of what some economists are calling the low-hanging fruit, such as the unwinding of supply chain snarls and other pandemic disruptions, or is it more of a broad disinflationary trend that involves most goods and services across the economy? thank you. chair powell. if i understood your question, i would say it this way. i think we knew from the time, from before when we lifted off, but certainly by the time we lifted, we knew   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary that bringing inflation back down was going to take, as i call it, the unwinding of these distortions to both supply and demand that happened because of the pandemic and the response. so that unwinding was going to be important. in addition, monetary policy was going to help. it was going to help supply side heal by cooling demand off and just, in general, better aligning supply with demand. so those two forces were always going to be important. i think it's very hard to pull them apart. they work together. i do think both of them are at work now, and i think they're at work in a way that shows you the progress that we are seeing. michelle smith. mike. michael mckee. michael mckee from bloomberg television and radio. in june, you forecast a 5.6 percent year-end median fed funds rate, and since then you've more than doubled your growth forecast. you've lowered your unemployment forecast significantly. so what would justify that last move, because the median forecast is for lower inflation? and given all the known unknowns that you face, how much confidence do you have, can investors have, or the american people have in your forecasts? chair powell. well, forecasts are highly uncertain. forecasting is very difficult. forecasters are a humble lot with much to be humble about. but to get to your question, though, what's happened is growth has come in stronger, right, stronger than expected, and that's required higher rates. unemployment, you know, you also see that the ultimate unemployment rate is not as high, but that's really because of what we've been seeing in the labor market. we've seen more and more progress in the labor market without seeing significantly higher unemployment. so we're continuing that trend. in terms of inflation, you are seeing the last three readings are very good readings. it's only three readings, you know. we're well aware that we need to see more than three readings. but if you look at june, july, and august, you're looking at, you know, really   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary significant declines in core inflation, largely in the goods sector, also to some extent in housing services, and just a little in non-housing services. those are the three buckets. headline inflation, of course, has come way down, largely due to lower energy prices, some of which is now reversing. so i think people should know that economic forecasting is very difficult, and these are highly uncertain forecasts. but these are our forecasts. you know, we have very high-quality people working on these forecasts, and i think they stand up well against other forecasters. but just the nature of the business is the economy is very difficult to forecast. michael mckee. given the forecast that you have, what justified not moving today, and what could justify moving in the future if you think inflation is coming down? in other words, why did you leave that extra dot in? chair powell. well, i think we have come very far very fast in the rate increases that we've made. and i think it was important at the beginning that we move quickly, and we did. and i think as we get closer to the rate that we think, the stance of monetary policy that we think is appropriate to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, you know, the risks become more two-sided. and the risk of over-tightening and the risk of under-tightening becomes more equal. and i think the natural, common-sense thing to do is as you approach that, you move a little more slowly as you get closer to it. and that's what we're doing. so we're taking advantage of the fact that we have moved quickly to move a little more carefully now as we sort of find our way to the right level of restriction that we need to get inflation back down to 2 percent. michelle smith. jennifer. jennifer schonberger. thank you, chair powell. jennifer schonberger with yahoo finance. with your focus on year-over-year pce, isn't it true that base effects are huge   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary and that by the time you meet in november that it's more likely that you'll have a low pce number that would make you feel more comfortable? and secondly, how would the lack of key indicators like cpi, the jobs report, impact your approach in upcoming meetings if we were to have a government shutdown? thank you. chair powell. i missed the first question. you missed what factors? jennifer schonberger. the base factors. chair powell. base factors. ah. okay. so on that, we're looking at just monthly readings and see what the increase was from the prior month. so you're right, when you go back 3, 6, and 12 months, you get base factors. but we can adjust for that. in terms of not getting data, again, we don't comment on government shutdowns. it's possible. if there is a government shutdown and it lasts through the next meeting, then it's possible we wouldn't be getting some of the data that we would ordinarily get and we would just have to deal with that. and i don't know. it's hard for me to say in advance how that would affect that meeting. it would depend on all kinds of factors that i don't know about now. but it's certainly a reality that that's a possibility. jennifer schonberger. would you feel more comfortable on the base effects that, as those kind of fall out of the equation for the next couple of readings by november, would you feel more comfortable at that point? chair powell. you know, yes. i mean, if you're looking, we can tell how much inflation has gone up in a given month, right? and, you know, that's what we're looking at. and month by month, what's the reading? and, you know, i think what we're really looking at is there's a tendency to look at, you know, shorter and shorter maturities, but they're incredibly volatile and they can be misleading. that's why we look at 12 months. but i think in this   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary situation where it looks like we've had a bit of a turn in inflation starting in june, we're also looking at six months and even three months, but really six months inflation. so you're looking at it over that period and over longer periods. that's the right way to go. and we don't need to be in a hurry in getting to a conclusion about what to do. we can let the data evolve. edward lawrence. thanks for the question, chair powell. edward lawrence with fox business. so i want to focus back in on oil prices. we're seeing oil prices, as you mentioned, move up, and that's pushing the price of gas. so how does that factor into your decision to raise rates or not? in the last two inflation reports, pce and cpi, we've seen the overall inflation has actually risen. chair powell. right. so, you know, energy prices are very important for the consumer. this can affect consumer spending. it certainly can affect consumer sentiment. i mean, gas prices are one of the big things that affects consumer sentiment. it really comes down to how persistent, how sustained these energy prices are. the reason why we look at core inflation, which excludes food and energy, is that energy goes up and down like that. and energy prices mostly don't contain much of a signal about how tight the economy is, and hence don't tell you much about where inflation is really going. however, we're well aware, though, that, you know, if energy prices increase and stay high, that will have an effect on spending. and it may have an effect on consumer expectations of inflation, things like that. that's just things we have to monitor. edward lawrence. on the consumer, they're putting more and more of this on their credit card. the consumer is seeing, you know, record credit spending. how long do you think the consumer can manage that debt at higher interest rates now? and are you concerned about a debt bubble related to that?   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary chair powell. so to finish my prior thought, i was saying that's why we tend to look through energy moves that we can see as short-term volatility. you know, turning to consumer credit, you know, of course we watch that carefully. consumer distress, measures of distress among consumers were at historic lows quite recently, you know, during and after the pandemic. they're now moving back up to normal. we're watching that carefully. but at this point, these readings are not at troublingly high levels. they're just kind of moving back up to what was typical in the pre-pandemic era. michelle smith. jean. jean yung. hi, jean yung with mni market news. yields along the treasury curve have risen to their highest in years. what is the fed's view about what's been driving that increase in recent weeks and how much of it can be attributed to macro explanations and how much to technical factors? chair powell. so you're right. you know, rates have moved up significantly. i think it's always hard to say precisely, but most people do a common decomposition of the increase, and the view will be it's not mostly about inflation expectations. it's mostly about other things, you know, either term premium or real yields, and it's hard to be precise about this. of course, everyone's got models that will give you a very precise answer, but they give you different answers. but essentially, they're moving up. it's not because of inflation. it's because probably it will probably have something to do with stronger growth, i would say more supply of treasuries. you know, the common explanations that you hear in the markets kind of make sense. michelle smith. kyle.   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary kyle campbell. kyle campbell, american banker. thank you for taking the questions. just two on housing. you've said slower shelter cost growth is in the pipeline and will reflect in inflation readings as new leases are signed, but there's also some questions out there about the way housing costs are measured, particularly the use of rental equivalents, which are estimates from homeowners about what their homes would rent for if they were in the rental market. so my question is how much of the effort to tame inflation, both as it's measured and felt by the broader public, hinges on housing supply? and then as far as a constrained housing supply being sort of exacerbated by this sort of lock-in effect of mortgages being higher now than they were at their recent historic lows, how is that going to impact future thinking about taking interest rates to that lower bound in the future? chair powell. so on the supply point, of course, supply is very important over time in setting house prices and, for that matter, rents. and so supply is kind of structurally constrained. but in terms of where inflation is going in the near term, though, as you obviously know, a lot of it is leases that are running off and then being re-signed or re-leased at a level that's not as high. it won't be that much higher. a year ago, it would have been much higher than it was a year before. now it may be below or at the same level. so as those leases are rolling over, we're seeing what we expect, which is measured housing services inflation coming down. your second question was the lock-ins. how much is that affecting things, really? kyle campbell. is that going to affect your decisions to potentially bring rates down to their lower bound in the future, sort of creating that sort of bubble of buying and then a lock-in that sort of stagnates the housing market? chair powell. i think we look at the -- i would look at the lock-in, the idea being that people are in very low-rate mortgages, and even if they want to move now, it would be hard   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary because the new mortgage would be so expensive. and that's one of the explanations for what's happening broadly in the labor market. would that play a role in our future decisions, in a future loosening cycle about whether we would cut rates? no, i don't think it would. i mean, i think we'd be looking at, you know, fundamentally, what rates does the economy need? and, you know, in an emergency like the pandemic or during the global financial crisis, you know, you have to cut rates to the point that you have to do what you can to support the economy. so i wouldn't think that that would be a reason for us not to do that. it's not something we're thinking about at all right now, but down the road, i wouldn't think so. michelle smith. nancy. nancy marshall-genzer. hi, nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. chair powell, you've mentioned several things that would possibly weigh on consumer confidence, maybe cut back consumer spending, possible government shutdown, high gas prices. at this point, would the fed welcome a decrease in consumer spending? would that help you get inflation closer to your 2 percent target? chair powell. i wouldn't say it that way. we're not looking for a decrease in consumer spending. it's a good thing that the economy is strong. it's a good thing that the economy has been able to hold up under the tightening that we've done. it's a good thing that the labor market is strong. the only concern -- it just means this. if the economy comes in stronger than expected, that just means we'll have to do more in terms of monetary policy to get back to 2 percent, because we will get back to 2 percent. does that answer your question? nancy marshall-genzer. yeah, and i guess on the other hand, would you worry that that could contribute to an economic slowdown or even a recession?   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary chair powell. well, that's always a concern. i mean, concern number one is restoring price stability, because in the long run that's something we have to do so that we can have the kind of economy we really want, which is one with sustained period of tight labor market conditions that benefit all, as i've said a couple times. so that said, of course, we also now, given how far we've come with our rate hikes and how quickly we've come here, we do have the ability to be careful as we move forward because of that consideration. michelle smith. simon. simon rabinovich. thank you, chair powell. simon rabinovich with the economist. one of the factors in the economic resilience to date appears to be a lesser degree of rate sensitivity than in the past. obviously, we've talked about households with long fixed-rate mortgages, also companies that refinanced before last year. what is your thinking about the efficacy of rates and how that's changed? and then related to that, how do you think about the distributional consequences in the sense that if you're a relatively wealthy household with a long fixed-rate mortgage, the past year has not been all that tough with rates going up, whereas if you're relying on your credit card for supporting your consumption, in fact, times are getting a lot tougher a lot more quickly? thanks. chair powell. so i guess it's fair to say that the economy has been stronger than many expected, given what's been happening with interest rates. why is that? many candidate explanations, possibly a number of them make sense. one is just that household balance sheets and business balance sheets have been stronger than we had understood, and so that spending has held up and that kind of thing. we're not sure about that. the savings rate for consumers has come down a lot. the question is whether that's sustainable. it could just mean that the date of effect is later. it could also be that for other reasons the neutral rate of interest is higher for   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary various reasons. we don't know that. it could also just be that policy hasn't been restrictive enough for long enough. and there are many candidate explanations. we have to, in all this uncertainty, make policy, and i feel like what we have right now is what's still a very strong labor market, but that's coming back into balance. we were making progress on inflation. growth is strong. but i think by many forecasts, many, many, many forecasts call for growth to moderate over the course of the next year. so that's where we are, and we have to deal with what comes. on your second question, which was distributional, can you be a little clearer about that? simon rabinovich. yeah, my point there was that if you're somebody who has a long fixed-rate mortgage, you've been able to endure the higher rates relatively easily. if you're somebody who's living month to month off of your credit card, current financing rates are punitive. chair powell. yes, and so the point i would make there is that we're trying to get inflation back down. the people who are most hurt by inflation are the people who are on a fixed income. if you're a person who spends all of your income, you don't really have any meaningful savings. you spend all your income on the basics of life, clothing, food, transportation, heating, the basics, and prices go up by 5 percent, 6 percent, 7 percent, you're in trouble right away, whereas even middle class people have some savings and some ability to absorb that. so it is for those people as much as for anybody that we need to restore price stability, and we want to do it as quickly as possible. obviously, we would like to do that. we'd like the current trend to continue, which is that we're making progress without seeing the kind of increase in unemployment that we've seen in past things. but you're right, though. when we raise rates, people who are living on credit cards and borrowing are going to feel that more. they are. and,   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary of course, people with lots of savings also have a much lower marginal propensity to consume, and so it's not going to affect them as much. michelle smith. let's go to greg robb for the last question. greg robb. thank you, chair powell. greg robb from marketwatch. in the beige book recently, you can tell that the fed has been surveying nonprofits and community groups about the economic health of low-income americans, moderate-income americans. i have two questions about this. are you going to use that data to maybe come up with sort of like a quarterly survey of those groups, like the senior loan officer survey? and also the second question is from your recent readings of these surveys, how are low- and moderate-americans doing? is there this thing where, like, the gdp is strong because of wealthy americans kind of driving things? i just want to get your sense of the health of that sector. thank you. chair powell. so i don't know about the quarterly survey. that's an idea we can take away and think about. in terms of how low- and moderate-americans, you know, they clearly were suffering from high inflation. i think during the pandemic, the government transfers that happened were very meaningful. and, you know, if you know the surveys that we take showed that low- and moderate-income people were actually in very, very strong financial condition. i think now it's a very hot labor market, and you're seeing high nominal wages, and you're starting to see real wages are now positive by most measures. so i think overall households are in good shape. surveys are a different thing. so surveys are showing dissatisfaction, and i think a lot of that is just people hate inflation, hate it. and that causes people to say the economy is terrible, but at the same time they're spending money. their behavior is not exactly what you would expect from the surveys. that's kind of a guess at what the answer might be. but i think there's a lot of good things happening on household balance sheets, and certainly in the labor market and   september 20, 2023 chair powell’s press conference preliminary with wages. the biggest wage increases having gone to relatively low-wage jobs, and now inflation coming down, you're seeing real wages, which is a good thing. thanks very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 3 4 page 2 federal open market committee  glenn follette, associate director, division of research and statistics, board raven molloy, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board jennifer gallagher, assistant to the board, division of board members, board michelle m. neal, head of markets, federal reserve bank of new york carlos garriga, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of st. louis anna orlik, principal economist, division of monetary affairs, board michael s. gibson, director, division of supervision and regulation, board damjan pfajfar, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board joseph w. gruber, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of kansas city pierre-daniel g. sarte, senior advisor, federal reserve bank of richmond valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board nitish ranjan sinha, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board matteo iacoviello,3 senior associate director, division of international finance, board dafina stewart, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board jane e. ihrig, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board clara vega, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board michael t. kiley, deputy director, division of financial stability, board jeffrey d. walker,5 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board don h. kim,5 senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board edward s. knotek ii, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of cleveland spencer krane, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of chicago andreas lehnert, director, division of financial stability, board paul lengermann, assistant director, division of research and statistics, board kurt f. lewis, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board dan li, assistant director, division of monetary affairs, board laura lipscomb, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board zheng liu, vice president, federal reserve bank of san francisco david lópez-salido, senior associate director, division of monetary affairs, board jonathan p. mccarthy, economic research advisor, federal reserve bank of new york ann e. misback, secretary, office of the secretary, board min wei, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board jonathan willis, vice president, federal reserve bank of atlanta donielle a. winford, information manager, division of monetary affairs, board paul r. wood, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board rebecca zarutskie, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board andrei zlate, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. u.s. data releases generally pointed to greater economic resilience than previously thought, and the reaction in market pricing implied both a higher expected trajectory for the policy rate at longer horizons and higher term premiums. policy-sensitive rates rose moderately, and longer-dated forward rates displayed larger increases. ten-year treasury yields ended the period more than 40 basis points higher, and broad measures of equity prices fell. bank equity prices underperformed over the period, but taking a somewhat longer view, investor sentiment toward the minutes of the meeting of september 19–20, 2023 page 3  banking sector appeared to have largely stabilized, with less differentiation of equity price movements across bank types. the dollar broadly appreciated against advanced-economy currencies over the period, as stronger u.s. data supported moderately increased yield differentials against these economies amid perceptions that policy rates were at or near their peaks. in china, signs of strain in the property sector increased, and optimism about growth diminished further, on net, although broader markets, including global commodity markets, did not appear to show elevated concern about chinarelated risks. u.s. financial conditions tightened, with higher longer-term rates, lower equity prices, and a stronger dollar contributing roughly equally to the increase in various financial conditions indexes. in addressing the increase in nominal yields on longerrun treasury securities over the intermeeting period, the manager noted that the rise in real yields exceeded that of nominal yields over the period, implying a small decline in inflation compensation. inflation expectations appeared to remain very well anchored. market participants cited various factors for the rise in longer-term nominal yields, including stronger-than-expected economic data, a possible increase in the neutral policy rate, greater economic and policy uncertainty, and largerthan-expected borrowing by the treasury. household and corporate borrowing rates increased over the period, generally rising in line with treasury yields. still, market participants noted that, with household and corporate borrowers having a limited need to refinance debt in the near term, it could take more time for past monetary policy actions to fully pass through to these sectors. regarding expectations for the september fomc meeting, the manager noted that responses to the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants and market pricing all pointed to a virtual certainty of no change in the policy rate. in addition, modal expectations for the policy rate from the surveys were that the current target range would be maintained until the may 2024 fomc meeting, compared with march in the previous survey, with a roughly onein-three chance of a 25 basis point increase by the november fomc meeting. for horizons beyond the middle of next year, the modal path from the surveys was notably lower than the market-implied path. the manager turned next to developments in money markets and desk operations. usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility contin- ued to decline over the intermeeting period, largely reflecting reduced participation by government and prime money market funds even as these funds continued to see inflows. increased supply of money market instruments, especially treasury bills, contributed to a slight increase in money market rates, which appeared to induce money funds to shift away from on rrp toward other instruments. however, the on rrp facility continued to provide an effective floor for the federal funds rate. with on rrp balances falling more than federal reserve assets, reserve balances grew over the period. at more than $3.3 trillion, reserves remained abundant. in the september survey of primary dealers, respondents generally saw a lower path for on rrp participation and a higher path for reserves, compared with the july survey. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the data available at the time of the september 19–20 meeting suggested that real gross domestic product (gdp) was rising at a solid pace in the third quarter. the labor market continued to be tight, with the unemployment rate low and job gains slowing but remaining strong. consumer price inflation was still elevated. the imbalance between labor demand and supply appeared to be easing. total nonfarm payroll employment increased at a slower pace over july and august than in the second quarter. the private-sector job openings rate and the quits rate, both measured by the job openings and labor turnover survey, moved down further through july. over july and august, the unemployment rate edged up, on net, and stood at 3.8 percent in august, and both the labor force participation rate (lfpr) and the employment-to-population ratio rose slightly. the unemployment rate for african americans declined, while the jobless rate for hispanics rose, and both rates were still above the national average. the easing of labor market imbalances was also evident in the recent wage data, with the 12-month changes in average hourly earnings and the employment cost index, and the four-quarter change in business-sector compensation per hour all lower than their year-earlier levels. consumer price inflation remained elevated but continued to show signs of slowing. the total price index for personal consumption expenditures (pce) increased 3.3 percent over the 12 months ending in july, and core page 4 federal open market committee  pce price inflation, which excludes changes in energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 4.2 percent over the same period; both total and core pce price inflation were lower than a year earlier. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 4.1 percent in july, down from its level earlier in the year. in august, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 3.7 percent, while core cpi inflation was 4.3 percent over the same period, and both total and core cpi inflation were well below their year-earlier levels. survey measures of consumers’ short-term inflation expectations had moved down alongside actual inflation but remained above pre-pandemic levels. in contrast, survey measures of medium- to longer-term inflation expectations remained in the range seen in the decade before the pandemic. available indicators suggested that real gdp was expanding at a solid pace in the third quarter. private domestic final purchases—which includes pce, residential investment, and business fixed investment (bfi) and often provides a better signal of underlying economic momentum than does gdp—also looked to be rising solidly, led by gains in both pce and bfi. after falling in the second quarter, real goods exports increased in july, supported by higher exports of automotive products. real goods imports also rose, as imports of consumer goods and capital goods partially recovered from their declines in recent months. the nominal u.s. international trade deficit widened, as growth in imports of goods and services outpaced that of exports. foreign economic growth slowed in the second quarter, as troubles in the property sector weighed on economic activity in china and monetary policy restraint contributed to the slowing in economic growth in europe. available data for the third quarter, such as purchasing managers indexes and measures of business confidence, pointed to a continued subdued pace of economic activity abroad. foreign headline inflation continued to fall but remained elevated. in several economies, though, energy prices turned up again. in the context of still-high core inflation, some central banks in advanced foreign economies (afes) raised their policy rates, despite a slowdown in economic activity, and indicated their intention to hold these rates at sufficiently restrictive levels to bring inflation back to target rates. in contrast, central banks of emerging market economies largely remained on hold, and some even began to cut rates amid easing inflationary pressures. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, generally robust economic data led to moderate increases in the marketimplied path of the federal funds rate and yields on shorter-term treasury securities. yields on mediumand longer-term nominal treasury securities rose more substantially, mainly reflecting higher term premiums and higher real yields. stock prices declined somewhat, but spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds were little changed. financing conditions tightened somewhat, and borrowing costs increased moderately. market participants pointed to a range of factors that may have contributed to the increase in longer-term forward rates, including higher term premiums and upward revisions to market views of the likely path of treasury debt over time. real yields increased almost as much as or a little more than nominal yields, leaving implied measures of inflation compensation modestly changed. the market-implied path for the federal funds rate in the near term was up slightly since the july fomc meeting, and the expected path further out, implied by overnight index swap contracts, rose moderately. broad equity price indexes declined somewhat, and the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500 index edged up slightly, on net, and stood near the 25th percentile of its historical distribution. conditions in domestic short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period. both prime and government money market funds experienced moderate inflows since the july fomc meeting. against a backdrop of heavy issuance of treasury bills and the modest associated upward pressure on treasury bill yields, take-up in the on rrp facility continued to decline over the period and fell below $1.5 trillion late in the period. over the intermeeting period, the dollar appreciated, as u.s. economic data came in stronger than expected, while foreign data suggested slowing economic growth abroad. long-term yields in afes ended the period higher, reflecting spillovers from higher u.s. yields and, to a lesser extent, the increase in japanese yields following the decision by the bank of japan to effectively widen its target range for the 10-year japanese yield. global equity prices declined moderately, reflecting higher long-term yields and increased concerns about the foreign economic outlook. bond and equity funds focused on emerging markets saw moderate outflows. minutes of the meeting of september 19–20, 2023 page 5  in domestic credit markets, borrowing rates for businesses, households, and municipalities increased moderately over the intermeeting period, mostly reflecting a pass-through of higher yields on longer-maturity treasury securities to those borrowing rates. interest rates on newly originated bank loans to businesses and households increased over the second quarter, interest rates on credit card offers increased in july, and interest rates on auto loans increased in july and august. up to the pandemic. the fraction of potential borrowers with a prime credit score expanded through the second quarter, moving further above its pre-pandemic level. the trailing default rates for investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds increased in july but remained at historically low levels. the trailing default rate for leveraged loans was little changed, on net, but downgrades of leveraged loans surpassed upgrades in july and august. bank credit conditions appeared to tighten somewhat over the intermeeting period, but credit to businesses and households remained generally accessible. commercial and industrial loan balances contracted, but outstanding commercial real estate (cre) loans increased from july through late august, though at a slower pace than earlier in the year. within the category of cre loans, nonfarm nonresidential loans contracted over the summer for the first time since march 2022. bank funding conditions were generally stable. core deposits declined but were offset by inflows of large time deposits. in contrast to many other types of loans, the payment performance of home mortgages improved. delinquency rates of federal housing administration and department of veterans affairs loans in july were lower than levels seen earlier this year, and delinquency rates of conventional loans remained at historical lows. credit quality was also strong for municipal borrowers. credit was available for most consumers. credit card balances grew in the second quarter through late august. for residential real estate borrowers, credit availability was little changed. credit conditions for small businesses were also fairly stable. the paynet small business lending index indicated that loan originations edged up in july and stood above the median of its prepandemic level. credit was generally accessible through capital markets, although issuance was subdued. issuance of nonfinancial investment- and speculative-grade bonds was muted in july but picked up modestly in august, and issuance of municipal bonds was weak in july. new issuance of leveraged loans was subdued in july, and issuance of agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (cmbs) was soft in july and august. credit quality deteriorated a little further across many sectors in recent months but remained broadly solid. in the cre sector, delinquency rates on nonfarm nonresidential cre bank loans rose over the second quarter, while delinquency rates on construction, land development, and multifamily loans were roughly unchanged. delinquency rates of loans in cmbs pools increased, driven by the office and retail sectors. the office delinquency rate rose more than 2 percentage points since january but remained below its pre-pandemic average. the delinquency rate for small business loans ticked up in june and july. delinquency rates for credit cards and auto loans increased further in the second quarter and stood a bit above their average levels in the years leading staff economic outlook the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the september fomc meeting was stronger than the july projection, as consumer and business spending appeared to be more resilient to tight financial conditions than previously expected. the staff assumed that gdp growth for the rest of this year would be damped a bit by the autoworkers’ strike, with these effects unwound by a small boost to gdp growth next year. the size and timing of these effects were highly uncertain. in all, the staff projected that real gdp growth in 2024 through 2026 would be slower, on average, than this year and would run below the staff’s estimate of potential output growth, restrained over the next couple of years by the lagged effects of monetary policy actions. the unemployment rate was projected to remain roughly flat through 2026, as upward pressure from below-potential output growth was offset by downward pressure from further improvements in labor market functioning. total and core pce price inflation were forecast to be around 3.5 percent at the end of this year, and inflation was projected to move lower in coming years, as demand and supply in product and labor markets continued to move into better alignment. total and core pce price inflation were expected to be close to 2 percent in 2026. the staff continued to view the uncertainty around the baseline projection as considerable. risks around the inflation forecast were seen as skewed to the upside, given the possibility that inflation could prove to be more persistent than expected or that further adverse shocks to supply conditions might occur. should these upside inflation risks materialize, the response of monetary policy could, if coupled with an adverse reaction in financial page 6 federal open market committee  markets, tilt the risks around the forecast for economic activity to the downside. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2023 through 2026 and over the longer run. the projections were based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections (sep) was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. regarding the economic outlook, participants assessed that real gdp had been expanding at a solid pace and had been more resilient than expected. nevertheless, participants also noted that they expected that real gdp growth would slow in the near term. participants judged that the current stance of monetary policy was restrictive and that it broadly appeared to be restraining the economy as intended. participants stressed that current inflation remained unacceptably high while acknowledging that it had moderated somewhat over the past year. they also noted that further evidence would be required for them to be confident that inflation was clearly on a path to the committee’s 2 percent objective. participants continued to view a period of below-trend growth in real gdp and some softening in labor market conditions as likely to be needed to bring aggregate demand and aggregate supply into better balance and reduce inflation pressures sufficiently to return inflation to 2 percent over time. in their discussion of the household sector, participants observed that aggregate consumer spending had continued to exhibit considerable strength, supported by the strong labor market and by generally strong household balance sheets. however, many participants remarked that the finances of some households were coming under pressure amid high inflation and declining savings and that there had been an increasing reliance on credit to finance expenditures. in addition, tighter credit conditions, waning fiscal support for families, and a resumption of student loan payments were viewed by several participants as having the potential to weigh on the growth of consumption. while household credit quality was seen as generally strong, a few participants noted rising delinquency rates on some types of consumer credit. a couple of participants also remarked that households were becoming increasingly price sensitive. some participants noted that housing demand was resilient despite higher interest rates; new home construction was solid, in part reflecting the limited inventory of homes available for sale. regarding the business sector, participants noted that activity continued to be solid, though several pointed to signs of softening conditions. many participants noted improved business conditions from an increased ability to hire and retain workers, better-functioning supply chains, or reduced input cost pressures. a few participants commented that their business contacts had reported difficulties passing on cost increases to customers. several participants judged that, over coming quarters, business activity would be restrained by tighter financial conditions, such as higher interest rates and more constrained access to bank credit. several participants noted, however, that the tightening of credit conditions resulting from the banking stresses earlier in the year was likely to be less severe than they previously expected. a number of participants expressed concerns about vulnerabilities in the cre sector. many participants commented that they expected that the autoworkers’ strike would, in the near term, result in a slowdown in production of motor vehicles and parts and possibly put upward pressure on automobile prices, but that these effects would be temporary. with respect to the agricultural sector, a few participants noted that conditions were mixed, as crop prices had declined amid higher production estimates and as supply and demand imbalances pushed up the prices of some types of livestock and held down the prices of others. participants observed that the labor market was tight but that supply and demand conditions were continuing to come into better balance. most participants remarked that a range of indicators of labor demand were easing— as could be seen by declines in job openings, a narrowing of the jobs-to-workers gap, lower quits rates, and a reduction in average weekly hours worked to levels at or below those seen before the pandemic. however, several participants noted that labor markets remained very tight in some sectors of the economy, such as healthcare services and education. many participants also observed that measures of labor supply, especially the lfpr, had moved up. some participants commented that the increase in the lfpr for women had been particularly notable, although they expressed concern that challenges regarding the availability of childcare could minutes of the meeting of september 19–20, 2023 page 7  affect the sustainability of this increase in participation. several participants noted that immigration had also been boosting labor supply. some participants observed that payroll growth remained strong but had slowed in recent months to a pace closer to that consistent with maintaining a constant unemployment rate over time. most participants commented that the pace of nominal wage increases had moderated, and a few also mentioned that the wage premium for job switchers had come down. they noted, however, that nominal wages were still rising at rates above levels generally assessed to be consistent with the sustained achievement of the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective, given current estimates of trend productivity growth. participants noted that the data received over the past several months generally suggested that inflation was slowing. even with these favorable developments, they emphasized that further progress was needed to get inflation sustainably to 2 percent. participants pointed to the softening of price inflation for goods amid improving supply conditions and to declining housing services inflation. several participants remarked that, despite the recent rise in energy prices, food and energy prices over the past year had contributed to a decline in overall inflation. however, participants also noted that significant progress in reducing inflation had yet to become apparent in the prices of core services excluding housing. participants noted that longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored and that shorter-term inflation expectations had been moving down from elevated levels. participants observed that, notwithstanding recent favorable developments, inflation remained well above the committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective and that elevated inflation was continuing to harm businesses and households—particularly low-income households. participants stressed that they would need to see more data indicating that inflation pressures were abating to be more confident that inflation was on course to return to 2 percent over time. participants generally noted there was still a high degree of uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. one new source of uncertainty was that associated with the autoworkers’ strike, and many participants observed that an intensification of the strike posed both an upside risk to inflation and a downside risk to activity. a majority of participants pointed to upside risks to inflation from rising energy prices that could undo some of the recent disinflation or to the risk that inflation would prove more persistent than expected. various participants noted downside risks to economic activity, including that credit conditions might tighten more than expected if the domestic banking sector experienced further strains; the possibility that the economic slowdown in china could result in a drag on global economic growth; or that an extended u.s. government shutdown could have negative, albeit temporary, consequences for growth. some participants remarked that an upside risk to their projections for economic activity was that the unexpected resilience that the economy had demonstrated so far could persist. several participants commented that a government shutdown might result in the delayed release of some economic data and that this outcome would make it more difficult to assess economic conditions. a few participants observed that there were challenges in assessing the state of the economy because some data continued to be volatile and subject to large revisions. in their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants concurred that economic activity had been expanding at a solid pace and had been resilient. while the labor market remained tight, job gains had slowed, and there were continuing signs that supply and demand in the labor market were coming into better balance. participants also noted that tighter credit conditions facing households and businesses were a source of headwinds for the economy and would likely weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. however, the extent of these effects remained uncertain. although inflation had moderated since the middle of last year, it remained well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent, and participants remained resolute in their commitment to bring inflation down to the committee’s 2 percent objective. amid these economic conditions, and in consideration of the significant cumulative tightening in the stance of monetary policy and the lags with which policy affects economic activity and inflation, almost all participants judged it appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent at this meeting. participants judged that maintaining this restrictive stance of policy would support further progress toward the committee’s goals while allowing the committee time to gather additional data to evaluate this progress. all participants agreed that it was appropriate to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in its previously announced plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. in discussing the policy outlook, participants continued to judge that it was critical that the stance of monetary policy be kept sufficiently restrictive to return inflation page 8 federal open market committee  to the committee’s 2 percent objective over time. a majority of participants judged that one more increase in the target federal funds rate at a future meeting would likely be appropriate, while some judged it likely that no further increases would be warranted. all participants agreed that the committee was in a position to proceed carefully and that policy decisions at every meeting would continue to be based on the totality of incoming information and its implications for the economic outlook as well as the balance of risks. participants expected that the data arriving in coming months would help clarify the extent to which the disinflation process was continuing and labor markets were reaching a better balance between demand and supply. this information would be valuable in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time. some participants also emphasized the importance of continuing to communicate clearly to the public about the committee’s data-dependent approach to policy and its firm commitment to bring inflation down to 2 percent. all participants agreed that policy should remain restrictive for some time until the committee is confident that inflation is moving down sustainably toward its objective. a few participants noted that the pace at which inflation was returning to the committee’s 2 percent goal would influence their views of the sufficiently restrictive level of the policy rate and how long to keep policy restrictive. several participants commented that, with the policy rate likely at or near its peak, the focus of monetary policy decisions and communications should shift from how high to raise the policy rate to how long to hold the policy rate at restrictive levels. a few participants noted that it would be important to monitor the real federal funds rate in gauging the stance of monetary policy over time. most participants observed that postmeeting communications, including the sep, would help clarify to the public how participants assessed the likely evolution of the stance of monetary policy. participants observed that the continuing process of reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet was an important part of the overall approach to achieving their macroeconomic objectives. several participants noted that the process of balance sheet runoff could continue for some time, even after the committee begins to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate. a vast majority of participants continued to judge the future path of the economy as highly uncertain. many noted data volatility and potential data revisions, or the difficulty of estimating the neutral policy rate, as supporting the case for proceeding carefully in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate. participants discussed several risk-management considerations that could bear on future policy decisions. participants generally judged that, with the stance of monetary policy in restrictive territory, risks to the achievement of the committee’s goals had become more two sided. but with inflation still well above the committee’s longer-run goal and the labor market remaining tight, most participants continued to see upside risks to inflation. these risks included the imbalance of aggregate demand and supply persisting longer than expected, as well as risks emanating from global oil markets, the potential for upside shocks to food prices, the effects of a strong housing market on shelter inflation, and the potential for more limited declines in goods prices. many participants commented that even though economic activity had been resilient and the labor market had remained strong, there continued to be downside risks to economic activity and upside risks to the unemployment rate. such risks included larger-than-anticipated lagged macroeconomic effects from the tightening in financial conditions, the effect of labor union strikes, slowing global growth, and continued weakness in the cre sector. participants generally noted that it was important to balance the risk of overtightening against the risk of insufficient tightening. committee policy actions in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had been expanding at a solid pace, and, accordingly, that the corresponding language in the postmeeting statement should be changed from “moderate” to “solid.” they also concurred that job gains had slowed in recent months but remained strong, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation had remained elevated. members concurred that the u.s. banking system was sound and resilient. they also agreed that tighter credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. members also concurred that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. in support of the committee’s objectives to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent. they also agreed that they would continue to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent of additional minutes of the meeting of september 19–20, 2023 page 9  policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, members concurred that they would take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, members agreed to continue to reduce the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and mortgagebacked securities, as described in its previously announced plans. all members affirmed that they are strongly committed to returning inflation to their 2 percent objective. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that their assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the system open market account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective september 21, 2023, the federal open market committee directs the desk to:  undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 5¼ to 5½ percent.  conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion.  conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 5.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day.  roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap.  reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month.  allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons.  engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a solid pace. job gains have slowed in recent months but remain strong, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated. the u.s. banking system is sound and resilient. tighter credit conditions for households and businesses are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. the extent of these effects remains uncertain. the committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent. the committee will continue to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. the committee is page 10 federal open market committee  strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lisa d. cook, austan d. goolsbee, patrick harker, philip n. jefferson, neel kashkari, adriana d. kugler, lorie k. logan, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 5.4 percent, effective september 21, 2023. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve the establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 5.5 percent, effective september 21, 2023. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, october 31– november 1, 2023. the meeting adjourned at 10:10 a.m. on september 20, 2023. notation vote by notation vote completed on august 15, 2023, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on july 25–26, 2023.  joshua gallin secretary 
e november 1, 2023 chair powell. good afternoon, everyone. welcome. my colleagues and i remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. we understand the hardship that high inflation is causing, and we remain strongly committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal. price stability is the responsibility of the federal reserve. without price stability, the economy does not work for anyone. in particular, without price stability, we will not achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. since early last year, the fomc has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. we have raised our policy interest rate by 5¼ percentage points and have continued to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. the stance of policy is restrictive—meaning that tight policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation—and the full effects of our tightening have yet to be felt. today, we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. given how far we have come, along with the uncertainties and risks we face, the committee is proceeding carefully. we will make decisions about the extent of additional policy firming and how long policy will remain restrictive based on the totality of the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. i’ll have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a strong pace and well above earlier expectations. in the third quarter, real gdp is estimated to have risen at an outsized annual rate of 4.9 percent, boosted by a surge in consumer spending. after picking up somewhat over the summer, activity in the housing sector has flattened out and remains well  below levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. higher interest rates also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. the labor market remains tight, but supply and demand conditions continue to come into better balance. over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged 266,000 jobs per month, a strong pace that is nevertheless below that seen earlier in the year. the unemployment rate remains low at 3.8 percent. strong job creation has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers. the labor force participation rate has moved up since late last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years, and immigration has rebounded to pre-pandemic levels. nominal wage growth has shown some signs of easing, and job vacancies have declined so far this year. although the jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. inflation remains well above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. total pce prices rose 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in september. excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 3.7 percent. inflation has moderated since the middle of last year, and readings over the summer were quite favorable. but a few months of good data are only the beginning of what it will take to build confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our goal. the process of getting inflation sustainably down to 2 percent has a long way to go. despite elevated inflation, longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecastters, as well as measures from financial markets. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship as it erodes purchasing power, especially for  those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. as i noted earlier, since early last year, we have raised our policy rate by 5¼ percentage points, and we have decreased our securities holdings by more than $1 trillion. our restrictive stance of monetary policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. the committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. we are committed to achieving a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation sustainably down to 2 percent over time, and to keeping policy restrictive until we are confident that inflation is on a path to that objective. we are attentive to recent data showing the resilience of economic growth and demand for labor. evidence of growth persistently above potential, or that tightness in the labor market is no longer easing, could put further progress on inflation at risk and could warrant further tightening of monetary policy. financial conditions have tightened significantly in recent months, driven by higher longer-term bond yields, among other factors. because persistent changes in financial conditions can have implications for the path of monetary policy, we monitor financial developments closely. in light of the uncertainties and risks, and how far we have come, the committee is proceeding carefully. we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation as well as the balance of risks. in determining the extent of additional policy firming  that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. we remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer-term inflation expectations well anchored. reducing inflation is likely to require a period of below-potential growth and some softening of labor market conditions. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run. to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you, and i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. let’s go to howard. howard schneider. howard schneider with reuters. thank you, chair powell, for doing this. to what—you referenced the rise in long-term bond yields—to what degree did that supplant action by the fed at this meeting? chair powell. thanks for your question. so, i’ll talk about bond yields, but i want to take a second and just sort of set the broader context in which we’re looking at that. so, if you—if you look at the situation—let’s look at the economy first. inflation has been coming down, but it’s still running well above our 2 percent target. the labor market has been rebalancing, but it’s still very tight by many measures. gdp growth has been strong, although many forecasters are forecasting, and they have been forecasting, that it will slow.  as for the committee, we are committed to achieving a stance of monetary policy that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time, and we’re not confident yet that we have achieved such a stance. so that is the broader context into which this, this strong economy and all the things i said—that’s the context in which we’re looking at this question of rates. so, obviously we’re monitoring, we’re attentive to the increase in longer-term yields and—which have contributed to a tightening of broader financial conditions since the summer. as i mentioned, persistent changes in broader financial conditions can have implications for the path of monetary policy. in this case, the tighter financial conditions we’re seeing—[coming] from higher long-term rates, but also from other sources, like the stronger dollar and lower equity prices—could matter for future rate decisions, as long as two conditions are satisfied. the first is that the tighter conditions would need to be persistent. and that is something that remains to be seen. but that’s critical. things are fluctuating back and forth—that’s not what we’re looking for. with financial conditions, we’re looking for persistent changes that are material. the second thing is that, that the longer-term rates that have moved up—they can’t simply be a reflection of, of expected policy moves from us that we would then—that if we didn’t follow through on them, then the rates would come back down. so, and i would say on that, it does not appear that an expectation of higher near-term policy rates is causing the increase in longer-term rates. so, in the meantime, though, perhaps the most important thing is that these higher treasury yields are showing through to higher borrowing costs for households and businesses and those higher costs are going to weigh on economic activity to the extent this tightening persists and the mind’s eye goes to the 8 percent—near 8 percent mortgage rate,  which could have pretty significant effect on housing. so that’s how i would answer your question. howard schneider. just as a quick follow-on, to be clear on this: in your opening statement just now, you seemed to imply that you are not yet confident that financial conditions are restrictive enough to finish the fight. is that true? chair powell. yes. that’s exactly right. you know, to say it a different way: we haven’t made any decisions about, about future meetings. we have not made a determination, and we’re not—i will say that we’re not confident at this time that we’ve reached such a stance. we’re not confident that we haven’t; we’re not confident that we have. and that’s—that is—the way we’re going to be going into these future meetings is to be, you know, just determining the extent of any additional further policy tightening that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time. michelle smith. jeanna. jeanna smialek. hi, chair powell. thank you so much for taking our questions. i wonder, you know, if you don’t raise interest rates in december, would the presumption be at that point that we should expect that rates are at their peak, or is there a possibility of restarting rate increases next year? and are there any costs to taking a more extended pause? chair powell. so, let me start by saying we haven’t made a decision about september. you’re asking a hypothetical there. but we’re going into december meeting—we’ll get, as you know, two more inflation ratings, two more labor market readings, some data on, on economic activity, and so we’ll be taking—and also the broader situation, the broader financial condition situation and broader world situation. we’ll be looking at all those things as we make a decision in december. we haven’t made that decision.  i would say, though, that, that the idea that if you—the idea that would—difficult to raise again after stopping for a meeting or two, it’s just not right. i mean, the committee will always do what it thinks is appropriate at the time. and, again, we haven’t made any decisions about— at all about december. we didn’t even—we didn’t talk about making a decision in december today. really, it was a decision for this meeting and understanding broader things. michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. nick timiraos, the wall street journal. chair powell, did the fed staff put a recession back into the baseline forecast in the materials for today’s meeting? and how much does this tightening and financial conditions substitute for rate hikes if the tightening is persistent? you had said it was worth maybe a ¼ point when we had the bank failures in the spring. what is it here on something that’s presumably more straightforward and more familiar to simulate? chair powell. so i guess i don’t want to answer your question about the—about the recession. but the answer is “no.” i think i have to answer it, since we did publicly say in the minutes—you’ll know anyway in the [next] minutes—the staff did not put a recession back in. i mean, it would be hard to see how you would do that if you look at the—look at the activity we’ve seen recently, which is not really indicative of a recession in the near term. in terms of how to think about translation into rate hikes, i think it’s just too early to be doing that, and the main reason is we just don’t know how persistent this will be. you can see how volatile it is. different kinds of news will affect the level of rates, and i think any kind of an estimate that was precise would hang out there and have a great chance of looking wrong very quickly. so i think what we can say is that financial conditions have clearly tightened, and you can see that in the rates that, that consumers and households and businesses are paying now.  and over time, that will have an effect. we just don’t know how persistent it’s going to be, and it’s tough to try to translate that in a way that i’d be comfortable communicating into how many rate hikes that is. nick timiraos. i’d like to follow up and ask what makes you confident—what makes you confident in the tighter financial conditions will slow above-trend growth when 500 basis points of rate hikes, qt, and a minor banking crisis have not thus far? chair powell. well, i just—that’s, you know, the way our policy works is—and sometimes it works with lags, of course, which can be long and variable, but ultimately, if you raise interest rates, you do see those effects. and you see those effects in the economy now. you see what’s happening in the housing market. you’re seeing that now. you’ll see, if you look at surveys of people, it’s not a good time they think to buy durable goods of various kinds because rates are so high now. i mention again, we’re getting reports from housing that the effects of this—of this could be quite significant. but you’re right. this has been a resilient economy. and it’s, i think, been surprising in its resilience. and there are a number of possible reasons why that may be. our job is to—is to achieve maximum employment and price stability, and so we take the economy as it comes. it has been resilient, so we just—we take it as it is. michelle smith. colby. colby smth. thank you. colby smith with the financial times. in terms of the thresholds that you’ve laid out of what could warrant further tightening, the additional evidence of persistently above-trend growth, or some kind of reversal in the recent easing of labor market tightness—that seems to suggest something more powerful than just one more ¼ point rate hike would be necessary. and i’m just curious if that’s how the committee sees it.  chair powell. so we’ve identified those factors. those were not meant to be the only factors or a specific test that we’re going to be applying with some metrics behind it. really, we’re going to be looking at the broader picture. you know, what’s happening with our progress toward the 2 percent inflation goal? is the labor market continuing to, broadly, cool off and achieve a better balance? we’ll be looking at that. you know, growth—we look at growth insofar as it has implications for our two mandate goals. we look at that, and we look at broader financial conditions. so we’ll be looking at all of those things as we reach a judgment, you know, whether we need to further tighten policy. and, if we do reach that judgment, then we will further tighten policy. colby smith. okay. and just in terms of the tightening of financial conditions, if that is having some kind of offsetting effect in terms of the need to potentially again raise rates, what then is the potential impact on the trajectory of rate cuts? could we see those maybe pulled forward or have to see more than what the september sep indicated? chair powell. so it’s, it’s—the fact is the committee is not thinking about rate cuts right now at all. we’re not talking about rate cuts. we’re still very focused on the first question, which is, have we achieved a stance of monetary policy that’s sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time sustainably? that is the question we’re focusing on. the next question, as you know, will be, for how long will we remain restrictive? will policy remain restrictive? and what we’ve said there is that we’ll keep policy restrictive until we’re confident that inflation is on a sustainable path down to 2 percent. that’ll be the next question, but honestly, right now we’re really tightly focused on the first question. the question of rate cuts just doesn’t come up because i think the first—it’s so important to get that first question, you know, as close to right as you can.  michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. steve liesman, cnbc. mr. chairman, i guess i had assumed that there was a tightening bias in the committee. you say in the statement you’re looking to assess the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the extent to which you may need to hike additionally. you didn’t say earlier that you were sufficiently restrictive. there were forecasts for two rate hikes among most members of the committee. but then you just said that, you know, we don’t—we haven’t made a determination. would you say the bias right now is neutral, that there is no disposition to hike again and that the committee largely has moved off of this forecast for two hikes? sorry, one additional— chair powell. no. i wouldn’t say that at all. i would say—i mean, the language, looking at it here, “in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time.” that’s the question we’re asking. steve liesman. so is it right to think of that as a hiking bias is still in the committee here? chair powell. we haven’t used that term, but it’s fair to say that’s the question we’re asking is, should we hike more? it’s not—it’s not, you know—that is the question, and you’re right that, in september, we wrote down one additional rate hike. but, you know—and we’ll [each] write down another forecast, as you know, in december. michelle smith. chris. chris rugaber. thank you, chris rugaber, at associated press. well, since the last meeting, the auto workers’ strike has finished, oil prices have leveled off, and yet, on the other hand, you have the outbreak of war between israel and hamas. how do you see all those factors, taken together, affecting the economy going forward? how are you thinking about those?  chair powell. so, there are significant issues out there, as you point out. global geopolitical tensions are certainly elevated. and that goes for the war in ukraine; it goes for the war between israel and hamas. we’re monitoring that. our job is to monitor those things for their economic implications. so, the uaw strike, as you point out is—appears to be coming to an end. oil prices have flattened out; they haven’t gone down. i guess they’ve gone down a little bit from their earlier peak. another one is the possibility of government shutdown; we don’t know about that one. so there’s plenty of risk out there. but i would go back to—the bigger picture from our standpoint is, we’ve got a very strong economy, strong labor market, making progress on the labor market, making progress on inflation. and we’re very focused on getting confident that we have achieved a stance of monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive. that’s really our focus. chris rugaber. great. and just one quick thing: you, last month, had gone to york, pennsylvania, where you talked to a lot of—or, yeah, last month, where you talked to a lot of small business owners. just curious, what sentiments did you hear from them or what did you pick up on and what would you—was there anything that surprised you the most in terms of what they talked about? chair powell. i wouldn’t say i was terribly surprised. i was very impressed by york as a town with a real strategy. and i would say it’s very impressive what the people there have put together in the face of, you know, some difficult longer-run trends about offshoring of manufacturing and that kind of thing. they’ve done a great job as a city, i think. you know, what you hear—and it’s consistent there—which is people are really suffering under high inflation. you were there. we talked to some people who, you know, were feeling that in their businesses and other people who were feeling it in their home lives as well. you know, it’s  painful for people—particularly people who don’t have a lot of extra financial resources who are spending most of their incoming, you know, income on the essentials of life. so we know that. that wasn’t new. but that did come through very clearly in, in the conversations we had in york, and, you know, i walked away from that even—you know, i mean, just thinking that we really—the best thing we can do for the u.s. is to restore price stability—fully restore price stability and not fail in that task and do it as quickly as possible, but also with the least damage we can. michelle smith. rachel. rachel siegel. hi chair powell. rachel siegel from the washington post. thanks for taking our questions. you’ve spoken before about the pain that would likely be coming for the economy in order to get inflation down. but since the economy has not responded to rate hikes in ways that would normally be expected, have you changed your views on that at all—on how necessary or inevitable that kind of pain would be, say, for the labor market or overall growth? chair powell. well, i think everyone has been very gratified to see that we’ve been able to achieve, you know, pretty significant progress on inflation without seeing the kind of increase in unemployment that has been very typical of rate hiking cycles like this one. so that’s, that’s a historically unusual and very welcome result. and the same is true of growth. you know, we’ve been saying that we need to see below-potential growth. and growth has been strong, but yet we’re still seeing this. i think i still believe, and my colleagues for the most part i think still believe, that is likely to be true. it is still likely to be true—not a certainty—but likely that we will need to see some slower growth and some softening in the labor market—in labor market conditions to get, you know, to fully restore price stability. so—but it’s only a good  thing that we haven’t seen it, and i think we know why. you know, since, since we lifted off, we, we have understood that there are really two processes at work here. one of them—one of which is the unwinding of the distortions to both supply and demand [that arose] from the pandemic and the response to the pandemic. and the other is, is, you know, restrictive monetary policy, which is moderating demand and giving the supply side time to recover—time and space to recover. so you see those two forces now working together to bring down inflation. but it’s that first one can bring down inflation without the need for higher unemployment or slower growth, it’s just—it’s supply—you know, supply-side improvements like shortages and bottlenecks and that kind of thing going away. it’s getting, you know, a significant increase in the size of the labor market now, both from labor force participation and from immigration. that’s a big supply-side, you know, gain that is really helping the economy, and it’s part of why—part of why gdp is so high is because we’re getting that supply. so, we welcome that. but i think those things will run their course, and we’re probably still going to be left—we think, and i think—we’ll still be left with some ground to cover to get back to full price stability. and that’s where monetary policy and what we do with demand is still going to be important. rachel siegel. against that backdrop, if you’ve gotten any clarity on lags—if you have an economy that’s been so resilient to high rate increases, does that suggest to you that there isn’t necessarily this huge wave of tightening that's still coming through the pipeline and that it may have already come into effect? chair powell. you know, i continue to think it’s very hard to say. so it’s been one year at this meeting—one year ago, this was the fourth of our 75 basis points hikes. so that’s a full year since then. i think we are seeing the effects of, of all the hiking we did last year and this year—we’re seeing it. it’s very hard to know exactly what that might be. but you can, for  example—an example where you wouldn’t have felt this yet is, is debt that had been termed out. but it’s going to come due and have to get rolled over next year or the year after. so—and there are little things like that where the effects have just taken time to get into the economy. so i don’t—i think we have to make monetary policy under great uncertainty about how long the lags are. i think trying to make a clear—get a clear answer and say, “i’m just going to assume this is really not a good way to do it.” and this is one of the reasons why we have slowed the process down this year, was to give monetary policy time to get into the economy. and it takes time. we know that, and you can’t rush it. so, doing—slowing down is giving us, i think, a better sense of, of how much more we need to do, if we need to do more. michelle smith. michael. michael mckee. michael mckee from bloomberg television and radio. i’m trying to connect the dots here. one quick clarification i wanted to ask about rachel’s question is, you said you need slower growth. you had always said before a period of lower-than-trend growth. has that changed? and, two, it sounds to me like you’re basically saying here that kind of the dot plot’s out the window, that every meeting is live with the possibility of a rate increase for right now—doesn’t matter about the turn of the year—and that there’s not an objective way to determine whether or not you’ve got enough tightening in the system. it’s just going to be a subjective judgment, meeting by meeting. chair powell. well so, let’s talk about the dot plot first. so the dot plot is a picture in time of what the people in the committee think is likely to be appropriate monetary policy in light of their own personal economic forecast. in principle, when things change, it’s not—that’s not, like, planned that anybody’s agreed to or that we will do. that’s a forecast that would change, for example—i mean, many things could change that would cause people to say, “i  wouldn’t write down that dot six weeks later.” think of the number of things that could change your mind on that. so i think the efficacy of the dot plot probably decays over the three-month period between that meeting and the next meeting. but, nonetheless, it’s out there. we don’t— we do personally update our forecast, but we don’t formally update the dot plot. so, you know, i think we try to be as transparent as we can about the way we’re thinking about these things. we’re laying out there our thinking, and, you know, as we approach the meeting, we’ll all be— my colleagues and i will be talking about how we’re processing that data. in terms of—so we’re not really changing the way—in terms of growth, what i said was “below potential.” so what you have here recently is growth that is—that is temporarily— potential growth is elevated for a year or two right now over its trend level. so the right way to think about it is, what’s potential growth this year? people think trend growth over a long period of time is a little bit less than 2 percent, or i would say just around 2 percent. but what we’ve had is, with the—with the, you know, improvement in the size of the labor force, as i mentioned, through both participation and immigration, and with the, the, you know, the better functioning in the labor market and with the—with the, you know, the unwinding of the supply chain and shortages and those kinds of things, you’re seeing actually elevated potential growth. there’s catch-up growth that can happen in potential. and that means that if you’re growing—you could be growing at 2 percent this year and still be growing below the increase in the potential output of the economy. i hope that’s clear. that’s really what’s going on. that’s why i would say it as below potential. michael mckee. but if you could clarify what i asked about the meeting by meeting, are we essentially now supposed to assume that it’s a meeting by meeting, live meeting  with a chance of a rate increase that will be decided on subjective criteria rather than objective at each meeting? chair powell. i mean, i don’t know that i want to just accept anybody’s characterization, but i’ll tell you how we’re doing this. so, we’re going meeting by meeting. we’re asking ourselves whether we’ve achieved a stance of policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. that’s the question we’re asking. we’re looking at the full range of economic data, including financial conditions and all of those things that we look at, and then we’re, we’re—you know, we’ve, we’ve come very far with this rate hiking cycle, very far. and you saw the spread at the september meeting of—you know, it’s a relatively small spread of—people think one or two additional hikes. so you’re close to the—to the end of the cycle. that’s—that was an impression as of, i believe, as of september. it’s not a promise or a plan of the future. and so we’re going into these meetings one by one. we’re looking at the data. as i mentioned, we’re also—we’re being careful. we’re proceeding carefully because we can proceed carefully at this time. monetary policy is restrictive. we see its effects, particularly in interest-sensitive spending and other channels. so that’s how i think about it. michelle smith. neil. neil irwin. thanks. hi, chair powell. neil irwin with axios. in light of the run-up in long-term yields we’ve seen the last several weeks, have you given any consideration to the pace of your asset runoff program? and if there were judgment that higher—that the higher- term premium was endangering the dual-mandate goals, would that be reason to think about slowing or suspending qt or should we think of that as a more technical question around reserves?  chair powell. so the committee is not considering changing the pace of balance sheet runoff. it’s not something we’re talking about or considering, and i know there are many candidate explanations for why rates have been going up. and qt is certainly on that list. it may be playing a relatively small effect, although i would say at $3.3 trillion in reserves, it’s not—i think—i think it’s hard to make a case that reserves are even close to scarce at this point. so that’s not something that we’re—that we’re looking at right now. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi. victoria guida with politico. i wanted to ask about the basel iii endgame capital proposal. you’ve gotten a lot of “pushback” from people on different aspects of the proposal, and you yourself expressed some reservations. and i’m just curious: could you accept finalizing that proposal without significant changes? chair powell. so, that proposal is out for comment. and we expect a lot of comment. we won’t get those comments until the end of, well, into next year. you know, we’ve extended the deadline. and we’ll take them seriously. we’ll read them. i’ll say what, what i do expect is that we will—we will come to a—we’re a consensus-driven organization. we’ll come to a package that has broad support on the board. victoria guida. so is broad support mean more support than the proposal had? chair powell. it means broad support. michelle smith. jonnelle. jonnelle marte. jonnelle marte with bloomberg. so, in addition to persistence, when you look at long-term treasury yields, what else are you watching to evaluate how those tighter financial conditions are hitting the economy and if it will lessen the need for further tightening? also, do you think that those higher yields could affect banking stress?  chair powell. so what do we look at? we look at a very wide range of financial conditions and, in fact, as you’ll know, different organizations publish different financial conditions’ indexes, which can have, you know, 7 or 8 variables, or they can have 100 variables, so there’s a very rich environment. and we tend to look at a few of them. i’m not going to give you the names, but, you know, they’re a few of the common ones that people look at. and so they’re looking at things like the level of the dollar, the level of equity prices, the level of rates, the credit spreads. sometimes they’re pulling in credit availability and things like that, so it isn’t any one thing. we would never look at, for example, long-term treasury rates in isolation, nor would we ignore them. but we would look at them as part of a broader picture, and they do play a role, of course, in many of the major standard financial condition indexes. your second question was? jonnelle marte. on the banking stress. chair powell. banking stress—so it’s something we’re watching. as you know, we, we did have—there were issues with interest rate risk and also funding uninsured deposits in the march—the things we went through in march and thereafter. and so we’ve been working a lot with financial institutions to make sure that they have good funding plans and good—and that they have a plan for how to deal with the kind of portfolio, unrealized, losses that they have. and we do think the banking system is quite resilient. we had, you know, a handful of bank failures but—so that’s, that’s what we’re out there doing. and we don’t have any reason to think that this—that these rate hikes are materially changing that picture, which is one of a strong banking system and one where there’s a strong focus by banks and by supervisors on liquidity, on funding, and those sorts of things. michelle smith. scott.  scott horsley. thanks, mr. chairman. scott horsley from npr. last week you and your colleagues put forward a proposal to lower the cap on debit card swipe fees for comment. could you just talk a little bit about the considerations there—what it would mean for merchants, for banks, for consumers, and also just what you all are seeing in terms of the use of both debit and credit cards in the—in the payment system? chair powell. you know, so you’re right. we put a proposal out for comment, is what we did. and, you know, this is a job that congress assigned us, as you, of course, know, in dodd-frank, and all we can really do is faithfully implement the statute. that’s, that’s all we’re trying to do. what else can we really do? it’s a 90-day comment period, and we typically don’t comment on these things once they’re out for—out for comment. and we do hope that stakeholders—and we know that they will use this opportunity to express their views. they haven’t been shy about that. so that’s, that’s critical and that’s, that’s what i can say about that now. michelle smith. edward. edward lawrence. thank you. thanks, chair. edward lawrence with fox business. so for the last three months, the year-over-year pce inflation was at 3.4 percent, core well over 3 percent. you’ve said in the past, 2 percent remains the federal reserve target, but with no rate increase today, how long would you be okay then with a 3 percent or 3 percent plus overall inflation? chair powell. you know, the, the progress is probably going to come in lumps and be bumpy, but we’re making progress. you know, i think the core pce [inflation rate] came down by almost 60 basis points in the third quarter. so the best thing i could point you to would be the september sep where, you know, the expectation was that, that inflation by the end of  next year, on a 12-month trailing basis, would be well into the 2s and the year after that, further into the 2s. so that’s, that’s—if you look historically, that’s, that’s sort of consistent with the way inflation comes down. it does take some time, and as you get—you know, as you get further and further from those highs, it may actually take longer time. but the good news is, you know, we’re making progress and monetary policy is restrictive. and we feel like we’re on a path to make more progress, and it’s essential that we do. edward lawrence. but you’ve said in the past that doing too little on interest rates could take years to fix, but the cost of doing too much could be easily fixed. how robust was the debate about this pause on the doing-too-little side? chair powell. that’s always the question we’re asking ourselves. and we know that, if we fail to restore price stability, the risk is that expectations of higher inflation get entrenched in the economy, and we know that that’s really bad for people. inflation will be both more—both higher and more volatile. that’s a—that’s a prescription for misery, and, and so we’re really committed to not letting that happen. you know, for the first year or so of our tightening cycle, the risk was all on the side of not doing enough. we’re, you know, we’re— we’ve come far enough that, that the risks, you know, have gotten more two sided. you can’t identify that with a lot of precision, but it does feel like the, the risks are more two sided now. and—but we’re committed to getting inflation back down to our target over time, and we will. michelle smith. simon. simon rabinovitch. hi, simon rabinovitch with the economist. quick follow-up to the question about banking stresses—you talked about how the banking system is resilient. of course, part of the resilience the past year stems from the bank term funding program that you launched in march. given that bond prices have not recovered, that unrealized losses are  probably mounting, how likely is it that you might have to extend that program in march next year? chair powell. good question. we haven’t really—we haven’t really been thinking about that yet. we—you know, it’s november 1, and that’s a decision we’ll be making in the first quarter of next year. simon rabinovitch. okay. sorry. quick second question about inflation expectations—the u. michigan sentiment survey showed a big jump in one-year-ahead inflation expectations last month from 3.2 to 4.2. last year you said that particular survey was a really decisive factor in one of your rate hike decisions. if it stays elevated next time around, how big of an input will that be into your december thinking? chair powell. yeah. we look at a range of, of things. i think the, the, the, you know, the um thing got blown out of proportion a little bit. it was actually a preliminary estimate that got revised away. and i said it was preliminary in it, but that didn’t get picked up. so we look at many, many things. so really, look across the broad array of surveys and also market-based estimates, and, you know, we do that really carefully at every meeting and between meetings. and, you know, there’s—it’s just clear that inflation expectations are in a good place. the public does believe that inflation will get back down to 2 percent over time,. and it will— they’re right. so—and there’s no real crack in that—in that armor. you can always find one reading that is a little bit out of whack, but, honestly, the bulk of them are just very clear that the public believes that inflation will come down. and that’s, of course—we believe that’s critical in winning the battle. michelle smith. megan.  megan cassella. hi, chair powell. megan cassella with barron’s. thanks for taking our questions. i wanted to see if you could talk about the neutral rate. you mentioned today that you’re still debating whether rates are sufficiently restrictive, and you’ve recently said that evidence is suggesting policy is not too tight right now. so i was curious if you could elaborate on that at all and whether that means the neutral rate, in your view, has risen. chair powell. yeah. so first thing to say is that it’s very important. it’s a very important variable in, in the way we think about monetary policy, but you can’t identify it with any precision in real time. and we know that. so you have to just take that—you have to take your estimate of it with a grain of salt. what we know now is, you know, within a range of estimates of the neutral rate policy, is restrictive, and it’s therefore putting downward pressure on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. so we do—we do talk about this. there’s not any debate or attempt to, you know, to sort of agree as a group on what—whether r* has moved or not. some people think it has, some people haven’t said—that don’t think it has. ultimately, it’s unknowable, and so really again, what we’re focused on is, you know, looking at the data and giving ourselves a little more time now to look carefully at the data by being careful in our moves. does it—does it feel like monetary policy is restrictive enough to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time? that’s the question we’re asking ourselves. i think, you know, years from now economists will be revising their estimates of r* as it existed on november 1, 2023. you can’t—we can’t really wait for that in making policy. we have to look—we have to have those models and look at them and think about them, and, ultimately, we’ve got to look at the effects that policy is having, accounting for the lags, which makes it difficult.  megan cassella. if i could follow up on a wages point. earlier you talked about the inflation outlook, but i’m curious if you have any concerns whether wage inflation at its current level could be—could risk pushing up overall inflation or re-acceleration? chair powell. so, if you look at the—look at the broad range of wages, they have— wage increases have really come down significantly over the course of the last 18 months to a level where they’re substantially closer to that level that would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over time, making standard assumptions about productivity over time. so it’s much closer than it was. and that’s true of the eci, which is the one that’s—the one that we got this week. it’s true of average hourly earnings and compensation per hour, too. so—and all of them are kind of saying that, which is great. and you have to look at a group of them because any one of them can be idiosyncratic from—in any given reading. so that’s what you see. and so what you saw with the eci reading was, if you look back a couple—it comes out four times a year—if you look back a couple of quarters, you’ll see it was much higher, then it came down substantially in june. and then the september reading was more or less at the same level as the june reading. so, in a way, it’s just validating that decline, and it was very close to our expectations internally, too. so i think we feel good about that. also i would say it isn’t—in my thinking, it’s not the case that, that wages have been the principal driver of inflation so far, although i think it’s all—i do think it’s fair to say that, as we go forward, as monetary policy becomes more important relative to the supply-side issues i’ve talked about in the unwinding of the pandemic effects, it may be that the labor market becomes more important over time, too. michelle smith. nancy.  nancy marshall-genzer. hi. nancy marshall-genzer with marketplace. chair powell, are you now as concerned about overshooting and raising interest rates too much as you are about getting inflation down to the 2 percent target? chair powell. so, as i mentioned, i think for much of the last year and a half, the concern was not doing too, too—not doing enough. it was not getting rates high enough in time to avoid having inflation expectations—higher inflation expectations become entrenched. so that was the concern. i think we’ve reached, you know, now more than 18 months into this. you can see by the fact that we have slowed down, although we’re still—we’re still—we’re still trying to gain confidence in what the appropriate stance is. but you can see that. we think, and i think, that the risks are getting more balanced. i’ll just say that they’re getting more balanced. the risk of doing too much versus the risk of doing too little are getting—are getting more— closer to balance, because policy is i think clearly restrictive at 5¼ to 5½ percent. that range, if you take off a mainstream estimate of the expected inflation, take one year inflation, you’re going to see that. you’re going to see a real policy rate that is well above mainstream estimates of a neutral policy rate. now that’s arithmetic. it doesn’t really—the proof is really in how the economy reacts, but i would say that we’re in a place where those risks are getting closer to being in balance. nancy marshall-genzer. okay. and you said the proof is how the economy reacts. what are you looking at to be sure you’re not overshooting? chair powell. well, i think what we’re looking at is are we still—is inflation still broadly cooling? do we—is it sort of validating the path we saw over the summer, where inflation was clearly cooling and coming down. now we’ve seen periods like that before, and they’ve just—there hasn’t been follow-through. the data have bounced back. so what are we  seeing? are we seeing—is inflation still coming down? so that’s the first thing. the second thing is, in the labor market, what we’ve seen is a very positive rebalancing of supply and demand, partly through just much more supply coming online. and with labor demand still clearly remaining very strong—when you have the kind of job growth we’ve had over the last quarter, it’s still very strong demand. so—and you see wage increases coming down as we discussed but coming down in a kind of gradual way. i think that’s—we want to see that, that whole set of processes continue. michelle smith. bryan. bryan mena. bryan mena, cnn. do you think that there has been any structural change in either consumption or in the job market that’s pushing at consumption? you obviously saw the third-quarter gdp figures, which were strong, and some economists expect everyone’s spending to have fizzled out by now. so i’m kind of wondering if there’s been any structural change in consumption. chair powell. i wouldn’t say there’s been a structural change in consumption. i would say it’s certainly been strong. and so a couple of things. we may have underestimated the balance sheet strength of households and small businesses, and that may be part of it. there may be—you know, we’ve been, like everyone else, trying to estimate the number—the amount of savings that households have from the pandemic when they couldn’t spend on services really at all, or in-person services. and, you know, there can still be more of that than we think, although at a certain point we have to—we’re going to be getting back to pre-pandemic levels of savings. we may not be there yet. so things are—clearly, people are still spending. the dynamic has been really strong job creation with now wages that are—that are higher than inflation, in the aggregate anyway, and that raises real disposable income, and that raises  spending, which continues to drive more hiring. and so you’ve had a really—that whole—that whole dynamic has been, and also at the same time, the pandemic effects are wearing off, so that goods availability, automobile availability is better—or was better, i think it still is. and, from a business standpoint, there are more people to hire. and it is more labor supply. so the whole thing has led to more growth, more spending, and that kind of thing. and it’s been—you know, it’s been good, and the thing is, we’ve been achieving progress on inflation in the middle of this. so, it’s been a dynamic. the question is, how long can that continue? and, you know, i just think this—the existence of this second set of factors at this time, which is the unwinding of the pandemic effects, that’s what makes this cycle unique, i think, and, you know, we’re still learning. that took longer for that process to begin than we thought, and we’re still learning about how it plays out. that’s all we can do. michelle smith. let’s go to daniel for the last question. daniel avis. thank you, chair powell. i’m daniel avis from agence france-presse. just a quick question following up on an earlier one with regards to the israel–hamas conflict. the fed’s financial stability report said the israel–hamas conflict and the conflict in ukraine “pose important risks to global economic activity, including the possibility of sustained disruptions to regional trade and food, energy, and other commodities.” you’ve had organizations at the world bank warning of a possible surge in oil prices if the war spreads to other countries in the region. i’m just wondering how the fed is monitoring these developments in the middle east—you mentioned they are—and just what the potential economic impact could be if the conflict does spread to other countries in the region. thank you. chair powell. i wouldn’t want to speculate too much, but i’ll just say so—you know, really the question there is, does the war spread more widely and does it start to do things  like affect oil prices in particular, since this is the middle east we’re talking about. the price of oil has really not reacted very much so far to this. as the—you know, as the fed—as the federal open market committee, our job is really to talk about [and] to understand the economy and economic effects. and it isn’t clear, at this point, that the conflict in the middle east is going to—is on track to have significant economic effects. that doesn’t mean it isn’t incredibly important and something for people to, you know, to take really important notice of, but it may or may not turn out to be something that matters for the federal open market committee as an economic body. but—so what the financial stability report does is it “calls out” risks. and that’s what it’s doing—[it] is calling out a risk of that. and the war in ukraine, the same. the war in ukraine did have, immediately, very significant macroeconomic implications because of the connection to commodities. so, thank you. thanks very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 4 attended through the discussion of the economic and financial situation. 3  page 2 federal open market committee jon faust, senior special adviser to the chair, division of board members, board kenneth c. montgomery, first vice president, federal reserve bank of boston ron feldman, first vice president, federal reserve bank of minneapolis norman j. morin, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board andrew figura, associate director, division of research and statistics, board michelle m. neal, head of markets, federal reserve bank of new york glenn follette, associate director, division of research and statistics, board fernanda nechio, vice president, federal reserve bank of san francisco jenn gallagher, assistant to the board, division of board members, board matthias paustian, assistant director, division of research and statistics, board michael s. gibson, director, division of supervision and regulation, board argia sbordone, research department head, federal reserve bank of new york christine graham,4 special adviser to the board, division of board members, board nitish ranjan sinha, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board joseph w. gruber, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of kansas city ellis w. tallman, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of cleveland michael hendley,3 associate director, federal reserve bank of new york robert j. tetlow, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board skander van den heuvel, associate director, division of financial stability, board matteo iacoviello, senior associate director, division of international finance, board francisco vazquez-grande, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board jane e. ihrig, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board clara vega, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board michael t. kiley, deputy director, division of financial stability, board david c. wheelock, senior vice president, federal reserve bank of st. louis don h. kim, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board randall a. williams, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board christopher kurz, assistant director and chief, division of research and statistics, board jonathan willis, vice president, federal reserve bank of atlanta sylvain leduc, director of research, federal reserve bank of san francisco paul r. wood, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board andreas lehnert, director, division of financial stability, board egon zakrajsek, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of boston kurt f. lewis, special adviser to the chair, division of board members, board rebecca zarutskie, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board laura lipscomb, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board andrei zlate, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board joshua louria, group manager, division of monetary affairs, board developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. financial conditions continued to tighten, driven by higher andrew meldrum, assistant director, division of monetary affairs, board  minutes of the meeting of october 31–november 1, 2023 page 3 yields on treasury securities as well as by lower equity prices and a stronger dollar, which themselves partly reflected higher interest rates. because earnings expectations had held up well in recent months, the effect of higher interest rates on equity prices likely took place largely through valuations. the rise since july in yields on longer-dated nominal treasury securities was mostly attributable to increases in real yields. there were small increases in inflation compensation, but the levels of spot and forward rates were within historical ranges. the manager also noted that survey measures pointed to generally stable inflation expectations, especially at longer horizons, and that inflation expectations remained well anchored. staff analysis and responses from the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants suggested that the bulk of the increase since july in the 10-year nominal treasury yield could be attributed to a higher term premium, though higher policy expectations at longer horizons could also have played a role. the manager also noted that liquidity conditions in the treasury market had not changed materially since july, suggesting that treasury market liquidity had not been an important driver of the increase in yields. the manager turned next to expectations for monetary policy. both market pricing and responses to the desk’s surveys implied that market participants expected that the federal funds rate was at or near its peak and would be held there at least until the june 2024 fomc meeting; there was a roughly 30 percent probability of a 25 basis point increase at either the december or january fomc meeting. regarding balance sheet policy, the surveys showed that respondents had pushed out the date they expected balance sheet runoff to stop, perhaps partly in response to policymakers’ communications that balance sheet runoff could continue even after the committee begins to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate. the manager then turned to developments in money markets and desk operations. balance sheet runoff continued to proceed smoothly over the intermeeting period through reduced holdings of treasury securities, agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities. the continued repayment by the federal deposit insurance corporation of discount window loans extended to banks that were placed into receivership also contributed to reduced federal reserve assets. on the liabilities side of the balance sheet, usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility declined further, as money market mutual funds continued to absorb new treasury bill issuance and appeared to increase investment in the private market for repurchase agreements (repos) as well. overall, the reduced usage of the on rrp facility released more reserves than the reduction in federal reserve assets and the increase in the treasury general account absorbed. on net, reserves expanded over the period, and available indicators pointed to them remaining abundant. primary dealers indicated that reserves were projected to remain within their recent range for the next several quarters. the manager also noted that 23 banks, in addition to all primary dealers, were already counterparties to the standing repo facility (srf) and that several more were in the onboarding process. together, these banks held the vast majority of srf-eligible securities in the banking system. the srf, in addition to the discount window, may therefore prove helpful for supplying liquidity to the banking system should funding pressures emerge. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the data available at the time of the october 31–november 1 meeting indicated that u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) had expanded at a strong pace in the third quarter. labor market conditions remained tight, with continued strong job gains and a low unemployment rate. consumer price inflation remained elevated. labor demand and supply were slowly moving into better alignment. easing labor market imbalances were apparent in the wage data, with the 12-month changes in average hourly earnings and the employment cost index each below their year-earlier levels. although total nonfarm payroll employment rose at a faster pace in september than in previous months, the unemployment rate was unchanged at 3.8 percent; the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio were also unchanged in september. the unemployment rate for african americans rose, while the jobless rate for hispanics declined; both rates were higher than the national average. consumer price inflation remained elevated but continued to show signs of slowing. the price index for total personal consumption expenditures (pce) increased 3.4 percent over the 12 months ending in september, while core pce price inflation, which excludes changes in energy prices and many consumer food prices, was 3.7 percent over the same period; both total and core  page 4 federal open market committee pce price inflation were well below their year-earlier levels. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce price inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 3.8 percent in september, also down from the level posted a year ago. survey measures of consumers’ short-run inflation expectations remained above their pre-pandemic levels. in contrast, survey measures of medium- to longer-term inflation expectations remained in the range seen in the decade before the pandemic. according to the advance estimate, real gdp posted a strong gain in the third quarter. private domestic final purchases, which includes pce and private fixed investment and often provides a better signal than gdp of underlying economic momentum, posted a smaller but still-solid increase. real exports and imports of goods and services grew at a robust pace in the third quarter after falling sharply in the second quarter, reflecting broad-based strength across categories. net exports made a slightly negative contribution to u.s. gdp growth in the third quarter, while the nominal trade deficit narrowed somewhat. foreign economic growth remained subdued in the third quarter. monetary policy restraint weighed on activity abroad, especially in europe, where euro-area gdp growth registered a small decline and the latest european central bank lending survey pointed to a contraction in credit from a year ago. although gdp growth in china improved in the third quarter, supported by an increase in industrial production, chinese retail sales continued to be held back by low consumer confidence and weakness in the residential property sector. inflation abroad remained elevated. while core inflation continued to ease amid slowing aggregate demand, energy price inflation increased in many foreign economies. with inflation still high, most major foreign central banks, while keeping their policy rates unchanged, indicated their intentions to hold these rates at sufficiently restrictive levels to bring inflation back to target rates. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, longer-term treasury yields rose notably, while shorter-term yields were little changed, and the market-implied path for the federal funds rate through 2024 declined slightly. the increase in longer-term treasury yields appeared to be mostly attributable to higher term premiums, as stronger-than-expected economic data seemed to increase the uncertainty regarding how long policy rates might need to remain high. meanwhile, equity prices decreased, and spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds widened. financing conditions tightened further, and borrowing costs continued to rise. the market-implied path for the federal funds rate through 2024 declined slightly over the intermeeting period. beyond 2024, the policy rate path implied by overnight index swap quotes increased, likely reflecting, in part, higher term premiums. the rise in longer-term nominal treasury yields was driven by real yields. shortterm inflation compensation fluctuated notably over the intermeeting period, largely following the changes in energy prices, but ended the period modestly lower. broad stock price indexes declined over the intermeeting period. equity prices in interest rate–sensitive sectors, such as real estate and utilities, underperformed the broader market. stock prices of banks also declined more than broader equity indexes. the one-month option-implied volatility on the s&p 500 index increased notably over the intermeeting period but remained below the peaks observed in the first quarter of 2023. over the intermeeting period, foreign asset prices were largely driven by spillovers from the rise in longer-term u.s. treasury yields. longer-term sovereign bond yields for advanced foreign economies rose, foreign equity prices declined, foreign credit spreads generally widened, and investors continued to withdraw from emerging market economy funds. stronger-than-expected u.s. data on economic activity and widening interest rate differentials between the u.s. and the rest of the world contributed to an increase in the staff’s broad dollar index. the bank of japan increased the flexibility of its yield curve control framework, which contributed to the rise in longer-term japanese government bond yields. the armed conflict between israel and hamas left a limited net imprint on foreign financial markets over this period. conditions in short-term funding markets remained stable over the intermeeting period. take-up in the on rrp facility continued to decline over the period. that decline primarily reflected money market funds reducing their usage of the facility and increasing their holdings of treasury bills and private market repos in response to slightly more attractive rates on these alternative investments. banks’ total deposit levels were roughly unchanged over the intermeeting period, as outflows of core deposits were about offset by inflows of large time deposits, which tend to be more expensive sources of funding. wholesale borrowing by large banks increased over the intermeeting period.  minutes of the meeting of october 31–november 1, 2023 page 5 in domestic credit markets, borrowing costs for businesses, households, and municipalities continued to rise from already elevated levels over the intermeeting period, primarily reflecting increases in longer-term treasury yields. interest rates on commercial and industrial (c&i) loans and small business loans increased, as did rates on loans to households, including for 30-year conforming residential mortgages, new auto loans, and credit cards. rates also moved up on a broad array of fixed-income securities, including residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities, municipal bonds, and corporate bonds. yields on corporate bonds rose more than treasury yields, particularly for speculativegrade bonds. credit continued to be generally available to businesses, households, and municipalities. total core loans on banks’ books continued to increase in the third quarter, although at a slower pace than earlier in the year. however, smaller firms were finding it harder to obtain credit, with the share of small firms reporting in september that it was more difficult to obtain credit compared with three months earlier rising from an already elevated level. capital market financing continued to be available, although issuance in most markets was below typical levels. in the october senior loan officer opinion survey on bank lending practices (sloos), banks reported tightening standards and terms on c&i loans to firms of all sizes in the third quarter. the most frequently cited reasons for tightening c&i standards and terms included concerns about the economic outlook, a less favorable or more uncertain economic outlook, and the effects of potential legislative changes, supervisory actions, or changes in accounting standards. banks also reported that demand for c&i loans weakened in the third quarter, with the most frequently cited reasons being decreased investment in plant or equipment and decreased inventory financing needs. similarly, banks indicated that commercial real estate (cre) loan standards continued to tighten and demand weakened further in the third quarter. credit in the residential mortgage market remained easily available for high-credit-score borrowers who met standard conforming loan criteria. however, in the october sloos, banks reported tighter standards and weaker demand for almost all categories of residential real estate loans in the third quarter. consumer credit remained readily available for most borrowers, although there were signs of tightening standards. credit card balances grew at a strong pace in august, while auto credit continued to grow at a modest pace. however, respondents to the october sloos reported tighter standards for all consumer loan categories in the third quarter. meanwhile, outstanding student loan balances declined significantly in august, driven by the cancellation of student loan debt for certain borrowers. the credit quality of businesses, households, and municipalities continued to show signs of deterioration in most sectors, as delinquency rates rose. the credit quality of nonfinancial firms borrowing in the corporate bond market remained sound overall, albeit with pockets of deterioration. the credit quality of c&i and cre loans on banks’ balance sheets remained generally stable through august. however, delinquency rates for nonfarm nonresidential cre loans recently picked up. in the october sloos, banks frequently cited concerns about credit quality, including for both c&i and cre loans, as reasons for tightening standards over the third quarter. the staff provided an update on its assessment of the stability of the financial system and, on balance, judged that the financial vulnerabilities of the u.s. financial system were notable. the staff characterized asset valuation pressures as notable. in particular, the staff noted that valuations in equities, housing, and cre were high. the forward price-to-earnings ratio for s&p 500 firms increased to the upper quartile of its historical distribution. house prices increased to the upper end of their historical range, relative to fundamentals, despite tight credit conditions in the mortgage market. while cre prices declined, valuations remained stretched, with capitalization rates remaining near historical lows. fundamentals in the office sector remained weak given the shift toward telework in many industries, especially for central business districts and coastal cities. delinquency rates on commercial mortgage-backed securities moved up as office and retail loan performance deteriorated. vulnerabilities associated with business and household debt were characterized as moderate. leverage in the financial sector was characterized as notable. in the banking sector, holdings of liquid assets remained high, and regulatory risk-based capital ratios indicated ample loss-bearing capacity in the banking system. however, the fair value of banks’ longer-term fixed-rate assets, including loans, decreased in the third quarter as longer-term interest rates rose. hedge fund leverage remained above historical averages, particularly for the largest funds. funding risks were also characterized as notable. reliance on uninsured deposits declined  page 6 federal open market committee in the aggregate but remained high for some banks, and short-term nondeposit funding had increased. staff economic outlook the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the october–november meeting was similar to the september projection. the staff expected fourth-quarter gdp growth to slow markedly from its third-quarter rate. all told, however, average gdp growth over the second half of the year was projected to be a little faster than the first half’s pace. the staff also expected output in the fourth quarter to be temporarily restrained by the autoworkers’ strike before being boosted in the first quarter as lost production begins to be made up. the size and timing of these effects were highly uncertain, however. with the lagged effects of monetary policy actions expected to restrain activity, real gdp was projected to rise more slowly than the staff’s estimate of potential over the next two years before rising in line with potential in 2026. the unemployment rate was expected to be roughly flat through 2026 as the effects of below-potential output growth were offset by the effects of further improvements in labor market functioning. total pce price inflation was expected to be close to 3.0 percent by the end of this year, and core pce inflation was expected to be around 3.5 percent. inflation was projected to move lower in coming years as demand and supply in product and labor markets moved into better alignment; in 2026, total and core pce price inflation rates were expected to be close to 2 percent. the staff continued to view the uncertainty around the baseline projection as elevated. risks around the inflation forecast were seen as skewed to the upside, given the possibility that inflation might prove to be more persistent than expected or that additional adverse shocks to supply conditions might occur. the risks to the forecast for real activity were viewed to be skewed to the downside. moreover, the additional monetary policy tightening that would be necessitated by higher or more persistent inflation, and the potential for a greater tightening of financial conditions, represented a downside risk to the projection for real activity. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook participants noted that real gdp had expanded at an unexpectedly strong pace in the third quarter, boosted by a surge in consumer spending. nevertheless, participants judged that aggregate demand and aggregate supply continued to come into better balance, as a result of the current restrictive stance of monetary policy and the continued normalization of aggregate supply conditions. participants assessed that while labor market conditions remained tight, they had eased since earlier in the year, partly as a result of recent increases in labor supply. participants judged that the current stance of monetary policy was restrictive and was putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. in addition, they noted that financial conditions had tightened significantly in recent months. participants noted that inflation had moderated over the past year but stressed that current inflation remained unacceptably high and well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. they also stressed that further evidence would be required for them to be confident that inflation was clearly on a path to the committee’s 2 percent objective. participants continued to view a period of below-potential growth in real gdp and some further softening in labor market conditions as likely to be needed to reduce inflation pressures sufficiently to return inflation to 2 percent over time. in their discussion of the household sector, participants observed that the incoming data on consumer spending had again surprised to the upside, likely supported by a strong labor market and by generally solid household balance sheets. nevertheless, some participants remarked that the finances of some households—especially those in the low- and moderate-income categories—were increasingly coming under pressure amid high prices for food and other essentials as well as tight credit conditions. several participants added that delinquencies on auto loans and credit cards had risen for these households. some participants commented that their district contacts reported a somewhat weaker picture of consumer demand than indicated by the incoming aggregate data. several participants, however, noted that repeated upside surprises in the aggregate spending data could indicate that considerable momentum could be sustained. a couple of these participants commented that the aggregate household sector may have more financial resources than previously thought, which could help account for the strength in spending. a few participants observed that activity in the housing sector had flattened out in recent months, likely reflecting the effects of further increases in mortgage rates from already elevated levels. business fixed investment was flat in the third quarter, and participants observed that conditions reported by their business contacts varied across industries and districts. some participants noted that businesses were benefiting from an increased ability to hire and retain workers, better-functioning supply chains, or reduced input cost pressures. a few participants commented  minutes of the meeting of october 31–november 1, 2023 page 7 that their business contacts had reported that cost increases could not be easily passed on to customers. several participants commented that the apparent resolution of the united auto workers strike would reduce business-sector uncertainty. several participants noted that an increasing number of district businesses were reporting that higher interest rates were affecting their businesses or that firms were increasingly cutting or delaying their investment plans because of higher borrowing costs and tighter bank lending conditions. a few participants noted that the tighter financial and credit conditions could be particularly challenging for small businesses. a few participants observed that higher interest rates were also affecting the agricultural sector, with their contacts noting that high financing costs were likely weighing on purchases of heavy agricultural equipment. regarding the energy sector, a few participants observed that energy markets had calmed after significant volatility at the start of the current armed conflict between israel and hamas. participants observed that the labor market remained tight. payroll growth was unexpectedly strong in september, and the unemployment rate remained low. nevertheless, participants assessed that labor supply and labor demand were continuing to come into better balance. measures of labor supply had moved up, with the labor force participation rate for prime-age workers rising this year, especially for women, and immigration also boosting labor supply. a few participants expressed concern that the recent pace of increases in labor supply might not be sustainable in light of challenges regarding the availability of childcare and the uncertainty regarding the extent to which immigration would continue to boost the growth of labor supply. regarding labor demand, various measures appeared to indicate some easing, including a downward trend in job openings, a lower quits rate, and reduced wage premiums offered to job switchers. consistent with the gradual rebalancing of labor market conditions, participants commented that the pace of nominal wage increases had continued to moderate. a few participants noted, however, that nominal wages were still rising at rates above levels generally assessed to be consistent with the sustained achievement of the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective, given current estimates of trend productivity growth. participants observed that inflation had continued to moderate since the middle of last year. both the 6- and 12-month change measures of core pce price inflation had come down somewhat in recent months, despite a less favorable monthly reading in september. participants pointed to the softening of core goods prices in recent months, as well as the continued gradual decline in housing services inflation. however, participants also noted that there had been only limited progress in bringing down inflation in core services excluding housing. participants noted that longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored. participants observed that, notwithstanding the moderation of inflation so far, inflation remained well above the committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective and that elevated inflation was continuing to harm businesses and households, particularly low-income households. participants stressed that they would need to see more data indicating that inflation pressures were abating to be more confident that inflation was on course to return to 2 percent over time. participants noted that in recent months, financial conditions had tightened significantly because of a substantial run-up in longer-term treasury yields, among other factors. higher treasury yields contributed to an increase in 30-year mortgage rates to levels not seen in many years and led to higher corporate borrowing rates. many participants observed that a range of measures suggested that the rise in longer-term yields had been driven primarily or substantially by a rise in the term premiums on treasury securities. participants generally viewed factors such as a fiscal outlook that suggested greater future supply of treasury securities than previously thought and increased uncertainty about the economic and policy outlooks as likely having contributed to the rise in the term premiums. some participants noted that the rise in longer-term yields may also have been driven by expectations for a higher path of the federal funds rate in light of the surprising resilience of the economy or a possible rise in the neutral policy rate. participants highlighted that longer-term yields could be volatile and that the factors behind the recent increase, as well as their persistence, were uncertain. however, they also noted that, whatever the source of the rise in longer-term yields, persistent changes in financial conditions could have implications for the path of monetary policy and that it would therefore be important to continue to monitor market developments closely. participants generally noted a high degree of uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. as upside risks to economic activity, participants noted that the factors behind the resilience in spending could persist longer than expected. as downside risks, participants cited the possibility that the effects on households and businesses of the cumulative policy tightening and tighter financial conditions could be larger than expected, disruptions from a potential government shutdown, and the possibility that the resumption of student loan repayments  page 8 federal open market committee could weigh on household spending by more than was expected. as upside risks to inflation, participants cited the possibility that progress on disinflation stalls or inflation reaccelerates because of continued momentum in economic activity. a potential for a broadening of the armed conflict in the middle east was seen as presenting upside risk to inflation through its potential effect on oil prices as well as downside risk to economic activity. in their discussion of financial stability, participants observed that the banking system was sound and resilient and that banking stresses had subsided. however, many participants commented that unrealized losses on assets resulting from the rise in longer-term interest rates, significant reliance by some banks on uninsured deposits, and increased funding costs at banks warranted monitoring. many participants also commented on risks associated with a potential sharp decline in cre valuations, which could adversely affect some banks and other financial institutions. several participants noted potential cyber risks and emphasized the importance of firms, particularly providers of critical infrastructure, being prepared to recover from such threats. a few participants also discussed the importance of monitoring treasury market functioning and potential vulnerabilities posed by the amount of leverage being used by hedge funds in this market. in addition, several participants emphasized the need for banks to establish readiness to use federal reserve liquidity facilities and for the federal reserve to ensure its own readiness to provide liquidity during periods of stress. in their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants noted that economic activity expanded at a strong pace in the third quarter and had been resilient. while the labor market remained tight, job gains had moderated, on balance, since earlier in the year, and there were continuing signs that supply and demand in the labor market were coming into better balance. while inflation had moderated since the middle of last year, it remained well above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent, and participants remained resolute in their commitment to bring inflation down to the committee’s 2 percent objective. participants also noted that tighter financial and credit conditions facing households and businesses would likely weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, although the extent of these effects remained uncertain. participants commented on the significant tightening in financial conditions in recent months, driven by higher longer-term yields, with many noting that it was uncertain whether this tightening of financial conditions would persist and to what extent it reflected expectations for tighter policy or other factors. amid these economic conditions, all participants judged it appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent at this meeting. participants judged that maintaining this restrictive stance of policy at this meeting would support further progress toward the committee’s goals while allowing more time to gather additional information to evaluate this progress. all participants agreed that it was appropriate to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in the previously announced plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. in discussing the policy outlook, participants continued to judge that it was critical that the stance of monetary policy be kept sufficiently restrictive to return inflation to the committee’s 2 percent objective over time. all participants agreed that the committee was in a position to proceed carefully and that policy decisions at every meeting would continue to be based on the totality of incoming information and its implications for the economic outlook as well as the balance of risks. participants noted that further tightening of monetary policy would be appropriate if incoming information indicated that progress toward the committee’s inflation objective was insufficient. participants expected that the data arriving in coming months would help clarify the extent to which the disinflation process was continuing, aggregate demand was moderating in the face of tighter financial and credit conditions, and labor markets were reaching a better balance between demand and supply. participants noted the importance of continuing to communicate clearly about the committee’s data-dependent approach and its firm commitment to bring inflation down to 2 percent. all participants judged that it would be appropriate for policy to remain at a restrictive stance for some time until inflation is clearly moving down sustainably toward the committee’s objective. participants also observed that the continuing process of reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet was an important part of the overall approach to achieving their macroeconomic objectives. a few participants noted that the process of balance sheet runoff could continue for some time, even after the committee begins to reduce the target range for the federal funds rate. several participants commented on the recent decline in the use of the on rrp facility, noting that the use of the facility had been responsive to market conditions.  minutes of the meeting of october 31–november 1, 2023 page 9 participants discussed several risk-management considerations that could bear on future policy decisions. participants generally judged that, with the stance of monetary policy in restrictive territory, risks to the achievement of the committee’s goals had become more two sided. but with inflation still well above the committee’s longer-run goal and the labor market remaining tight, most participants continued to see upside risks to inflation. these risks included the possibility that the imbalance of aggregate demand and supply could persist longer than expected and slow the progress on inflation, geopolitical tensions and risks emanating from global oil markets, the effects of a tight housing market on shelter inflation, and the potential for more limited declines in goods prices. many participants commented that even though economic activity had been resilient and the labor market had continued to be strong, downside risks to economic activity remained. such risks included potentially larger-than-expected effects of the tightening in financial and credit conditions on aggregate demand and on bank, business, and household balance sheets; continued weakness in the cre sector; and potential disruptions to global oil markets. committee policy actions in their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that economic activity had expanded at a strong pace in the third quarter, job gains had moderated since earlier in the year but remained strong, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation had remained elevated. members concurred that the u.s. banking system was sound and resilient. they also agreed that tighter financial and credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. members agreed that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. in support of the committee’s objectives to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent. they also agreed that they would continue to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, members concurred that they would take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, members agreed to continue to reduce the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and mortgagebacked securities, as described in its previously announced plans. all members affirmed that they are strongly committed to returning inflation to their 2 percent objective. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that their assessments would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the system open market account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective november 2, 2023, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 5¼ to 5½ percent. • conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. • conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 5.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day. • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings  page 10 federal open market committee of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators suggest that economic activity expanded at a strong pace in the third quarter. job gains have moderated since earlier in the year but remain strong, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation remains elevated. the u.s. banking system is sound and resilient. tighter financial and credit conditions for households and businesses are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. the extent of these effects remains uncertain. the committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent. the committee will continue to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lisa d. cook, austan d. goolsbee, patrick harker, philip n. jefferson, neel kashkari, adriana d. kugler, lorie k. logan, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 5.4 percent, effective november 2, 2023. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve the establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 5.5 percent, effective november 2, 2023. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, december 12– 13, 2023. the meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on november 1, 2023. notation vote by notation vote completed on october 10, 2023, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on september 19–20, 2023.  joshua gallin secretary 
ce december 13, 2023 chair powell. good afternoon. my colleagues and i remain squarely focused on our dual mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. as we approach the end of the year, it’s natural to look back on the progress that has been made toward our dual-mandate objectives. inflation has eased from its highs, and this has come without a significant increase in unemployment. that’s very good news. but inflation is still too high, ongoing progress in bringing it down is not assured, and the path forward is uncertain. as we look ahead to next year, i want to assure the american people that we’re fully committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent goal. restoring price stability is essential to achieve a sustained period of strong labor market conditions that benefit all. since early last year, the fomc has significantly tightened the stance of monetary policy. we’ve raised our policy interest rate by 5¼ percentage points and have continued to reduce our securities holdings at a brisk pace. our actions have moved our policy rate well into restrictive territory, meaning that tight policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation, and the full effects of our tightening likely have not yet been felt. today, we decided to leave our policy interest rate unchanged and to continue to reduce our securities holdings. given how far we have come, along with the uncertainties and risks that we face, the committee is proceeding carefully. we will make decisions about the extent of any additional policy firming and how long policy will remain restrictive based on the totality of the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. i will have more to say about monetary policy after briefly reviewing economic developments. recent indicators suggest that growth of economic activity has slowed substantially from the outsized pace seen in the third quarter. even so, gdp is on track to expand around  2½ percent for the year as a whole, bolstered by strong consumer demand as well as improving supply conditions. after picking somewhat over the—up somewhat over the summer, activity in the housing sector has flattened out and remains well below the levels of a year ago, largely reflecting higher mortgage rates. higher interest rates also appear to be weighing on business fixed investment. in our summary of economic projections (sep), committee participants revised up their assessments of gdp growth this year but expect growth to cool, with the median projection falling to 1.4 percent next year. the labor market remains tight, but supply and demand conditions continue to come into better balance. over the past three months, payroll job gains averaged 204,000 jobs per month, a strong pace that is nevertheless below that seen earlier in the year. the unemployment rate remains low at 3.7 percent. strong job creation has been accompanied by an increase in the supply of workers. the labor force participation rate has moved up since last year, particularly for individuals aged 25 to 54 years, and immigration has returned to pre-pandemic levels. nominal wage growth appears to be easing, and job vacancies have declined. although the jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, labor demand still exceeds the supply of available workers. fomc participants expect the rebalancing in the labor market to continue, easing upward pressures on inflation. the median unemployment rate projection in the sep rises somewhat from 3.8 percent at the end of this year to 4.1 percent at the end of next year. inflation has eased over the past year but remains above our longer-run goal of 2 percent. based on the consumer price index and other data, we estimate that total pce prices rose 2.6 percent over the 12 months ending in november and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core pce prices rose 3.1 percent.  the lower inflation readings over the past several months are welcome, but we will need to see further evidence to build confidence that inflation is moving down sustainably toward our goal. longer-term inflation expectations appear to remain well anchored, as reflected in a broad range of surveys of households, businesses, and forecasters, as well as measures from financial markets. as is evident from the sep, we anticipate that the process of getting inflation all the way to 2 percent will take some time. the median projection in the sep is 2.8 percent this year, falls to 2.4 percent next year, and reaches 2 percent in 2026. the fed’s monetary policy actions are guided by our mandate to promote maximum employment and stable prices for the american people. my colleagues and i are acutely aware that high inflation imposes significant hardship, as it erodes purchasing power, especially for those least able to meet the higher costs of essentials like food, housing, and transportation. we are highly, highly attentive to the risks that high inflation poses to both sides of our mandate, and we are strongly committed to returning inflation to our 2 percent objective. as i noted earlier, since early last year, we have raised our policy rate by 5¼ percentage points, and we have decreased our securities holdings by more than $1 trillion. our restrictive stance of monetary policy is putting downward pressure on economic activity and inflation. the committee decided at today’s meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent and to continue the process of significantly reducing our securities holdings. while we believe that our policy rate is likely at or near its peak for this tightening cycle, the economy has surprised forecasters in many ways since the pandemic, and ongoing progress—sorry—ongoing progress toward our 2 percent inflation objective is not assured. we are prepared to tighten policy further if appropriate. we’re committed to achieving a stance of  monetary policy that is sufficiently restrictive to bring inflation sustainably down to 2 percent over time and to keeping policy restrictive until we’re confident that inflation is on a path to that objective. in our sep, fomc participants wrote down their individual assessments of an appropriate path for the federal funds rate based on what each participant judges to be the most likely scenario going forward. while participants do not view it as likely to be appropriate to raise interest rates further, neither do they want to take the possibility off the table. if the economy evolves as projected, the median participant projects that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate will be 4.6 percent at the end of 2024, 3.6 percent at the end of 2025, and 2.9 percent at the end of 2026, still above the median longer-term rate. these projections are not a committee decision or plan; if the economy does not evolve as projected, the path of policy will adjust as appropriate to foster our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. in light of the uncertainties and risks, and how far we have come, the committee is proceeding carefully. we will continue to make our decisions meeting by meeting, based on the totality of the incoming data and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks. in determining the extent of any additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. we remain committed to bringing inflation back down to our 2 percent goal and to keeping longer- term inflation expectations well anchored. restoring price stability is essential to set the stage for achieving maximum employment and stable prices over the longer run.  to conclude: we understand that our actions affect communities, families, and businesses across the country. everything we do is in service to our public mission. we at the fed will do everything we can to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals. thank you. i look forward to your questions. michelle smith. let’s go to chris rugaber. christopher rugaber. thank you. chris rugaber at associated press. i wanted to ask, how should we interpret the addition of the word “any” before “additional . . . firming” in the statement? i mean, does that mean that you’re pretty much done with rate hikes and the committee has shifted away from a tightening bias and toward a more neutral stance? thank you. chair powell. so—specifically on “any”: we do say that “in determining the extent of any additional policy firming that may be appropriate,” so “any additional policy firming”—that sentence. so we added the word “any” as an acknowledgement that we believe that we are likely at or near the, the peak rate for this cycle. participants didn’t write down additional hikes that we believe are likely, so that’s what we wrote down. but participants also didn’t want to take the possibility of further hikes off the table. so that’s really what we were thinking. michelle smith. steve. steve liesman. steve liesman, cnbc. happy holidays, mr. chairman. fed governor chris waller said that if inflation continues to fall, then the fed in the next several months could be cutting interest rates. i wonder if you could comment on whether you agree with fed governor waller on that, that the fed would become more restrictive if it didn’t cut rates if inflation fell. thank you, sir.  chair powell. so, of course, i don’t comment on, on any other officials, even those who work at the fed. but i’ll—but i’ll try to answer your question more broadly. so the way— the way we’re looking at it is, is really this. when we started out, right, we said the first question is, how fast to move, and we moved very fast. the second question is, you know, really, how high to raise the policy rate? and that’s really the question that we’re still on here. we’re, we’re very focused on that, as i—as i mentioned. people generally think that we’re at or near that and, and think it’s not likely that we will hike, although they don’t take that possibility off the table. so that’s—when you get to that question, and that’s your answer, there’s a natural—naturally, it begins to be the next question, which is when it will become appropriate to begin dialing back the amount of policy restraint that’s in place. so that’s really the next question, and that’s what people are thinking about and, and talking about. and i would just say this. we are seeing, you know, strong growth that is—that appears to be moderating; we’re seeing a labor market that is coming back into balance by so many measures; and we’re seeing inflation making real progress. these are the things we’ve been wanting to see. we can’t know. we still have a ways to go. no one is declaring victory. that would be premature. and we can’t be guaranteed of this progress [continuing]. so we’re, we’re moving carefully in making that assessment of whether we need to do more or not. and that’s, that’s really the question that we’re on. but, of course, the other question, the question of when will it become appropriate to begin dialing back the amount of policy restraint in place, that, that begins to come into view and is clearly a discussion—topic of discussion out in the world and also a discussion for us at our meeting today. steve liesman. can you give some color as to the nature of that discussion today? thank you.  chair powell. sure. so it, it comes up in this way today. everybody wrote down an sep forecast. so many people mentioned what their—what their rate forecast was. and there was no back-and-forth, no attempt to sort of reach agreement like, “this is what i wrote down; this is what i think,” that kind of thing, and a preliminary kind of a discussion like that. not everybody did that, but many people did. and then, and i would say, there’s a general expectation that this will be—this will be a topic for us, looking ahead. that, that’s really what happened in today’s meeting. i can’t do the head count for you in real time. but that’s generally what happened today. steve liesman. thank you. michelle smith. let’s go to rachel. rachel siegel. hi, chair powell. rachel siegel from the washington post. thanks for taking our questions. at this point, can you confidently say that the economy has avoided a recession and isn’t heading for one now? and if the answer is “no,” i’m curious about what you’d still be looking for. thanks. chair powell. i think you can say that there’s little basis for thinking that the economy is in a recession now. i would say that. i think there’s, there’s always a probability that, that there will be a recession in the next year, and it’s a meaningful probability no matter what the economy is doing. so it’s always a real possibility. the question is, is it—so it’s a possibility here. i have always felt, since the beginning, that there was a possibility, because of the unusual situation, that the economy could cool off in a way that enabled inflation to come down without the kind of large job losses that have often been associated with high inflation and tightening cycles. so far, that’s what we’re seeing. that’s what many forecasters, on and off the committee, are seeing. this result is not  guaranteed. it is—it is far too early to declare victory. and there are certainly risks. it’s certainly possible that, that the economy will behave in an unexpected way. it has done that repeatedly through the post—in the post-pandemic period. nonetheless, where we are is, is we see the things that i—that i mentioned. rachel siegel. i’m curious, if you’re looking back on the past year, you talked about “navigating by the stars under cloudy skies.” can you talk about some of the ways in which the economy surprised you most this year, where you thought it would behave in one way and had to pivot to respond? thanks. chair powell. so i think forecasters generally, if you go back a year, were very broadly forecasting a recession for this year, for 2023. and not only did that not happen—that includes fed forecasters and really, essentially, all forecasters; a very high proportion of forecasters predicted very weak growth or a recession—not only did that not happen, we actually had a very strong year, and that was a combination of, of strong demand but also of real gains on the supply side. so this was the year when labor force participation picked up, where immigration picked up, where the distortions to supply and demand from the pandemic—you know, the shortages and the bottlenecks—really began to unwind. so we had significant supply-side gains with strong demand, and we got what looks like a 2½ percent-plus, or a little more than that, growth year at a time when potential growth this year might even have been higher than that, just because of the healing on the supply side. so that was a surprise to just about everybody. i think the inflation forecast is roughly, roughly what people wrote down a year ago, but in a very different setting. and i would say the labor market, because of the stronger growth, has also been significantly better. if you look back at the sep from a year ago, there was a  significant increase in, in unemployment. it didn’t really happen. we’re still at 3.7 percent. so we’ve seen, you know, strong growth, still a tight labor market but one that’s coming back into balance with the—with support from the supply side, a greater supply of labor. it’s a—you know, that’s, that’s what we see, and i think that combination was, was not anticipated broadly. michelle smith. howard. howard schneider. thanks. howard schneider with reuters, and thanks for taking the questions. i, i wonder if you could give a little more color or detail on what—on what motivates the lower rates next year, whether it’s a coincidence, for example, that the spread between pce inflation, core inflation, and the federal funds rate stays constant over the year. are you simply calibrating against the fall in prices, in the price level that you’re expecting, in the rate of inflation that you’re expecting as opposed to supporting the economy? chair powell. nothing quite that mechanical is happening. the sep really is, is a bottoms-up—built from the bottom up, right? so i think people are looking at what’s happening in the economy. and i think if you look at the big difference from september in the sep, [it is that] the expectations for inflation this year, both headline and core, have come down, you know, really significantly in three months. that’s a big piece of, of this. at the same time, [real gdp] growth has turned out to be very strong in the third quarter. [now it] is slowing, we believe, as, as appropriate. and we’ve got—we’ve had several labor market reports, which suggest, again, significant progress toward greater balance across a very—a broad range of indicators. you’re seeing so many of the indicators coming back to normal, not all of them. but so i think that people look at that, and they write down their—basically, each individual writes down a forecast and a rate forecast that goes with that forecast. we tabulate them and, and publish it. and so it’s not—it isn’t—you ask about real rates, i take it?  howard schneider. yes. chair powell. you know, that’s—that is—that is something that we’re very conscious of, and aware of, and monitor, and it’s certainly a big part of—it’s a part of how we think about things. but, really, it’s broader financial conditions that matter. and, as you well know, it’s so hard to know exactly, you know, what the—what the real rate is or exactly how tight policy is at any given time. so you couldn’t follow that like it was a rule and think that you would get the right answer all the time, but it’s certainly something that we’re focused on. and, indeed, if you look at the projections, i think the expectation would be that the real rate is declining as we—as we move forward. howard schneider. it sounds like the discussion—if i could follow up—has, has already kind of begun. i’m wondering, just related to, to steve’s question, how the—how the tactics of this play out given the slowing of inflation and the fact that the deeper you get into 2024, the closer you get to a presidential election. do you want to front-load this, in other words? chair powell. yeah. no, we—we’re—we don’t think about political events. we don’t think about politics. we think about what’s the right thing to do for the economy. the minute we start thinking about those things—you know, we just can’t do that. we have to think, what’s the right thing? we’ll do the things that we think are right for the economy at the time we—when we think is the right time. that’s what we’ll always do. so i mentioned we’re moving carefully. one of the things we’re moving carefully about is that decision over—that assessment, really—over whether, whether we’ve done enough, really. and you see that people are not writing down rate hikes. that’s, that’s us thinking that we have done enough but not, not feeling that really strongly, confidently and not wanting to  take the possibility of a rate hike off the table. nonetheless, it’s not the base case anymore, obviously, as it was, you know, 60, 90 days ago. so that’s, that’s how we’re—that’s how we’re approaching things. and, and, you know, as i mentioned, we wrote down this sep, and it talks about—people have individual assessments of when it will be appropriate to, you know, to start to dial back on, on the tight policy we have in place, and that’s a discussion we’ll be having going forward. but that’s another assessment that we’re going to make very carefully, so as time goes forward. michelle smith. nick. nick timiraos. nick timiraos of the wall street journal. chair powell, you’ve argued over the last year that policy tightening started before you actually lifted off because the market anticipated your moves and tightened on your behalf. the market is now easing policy on your behalf by anticipating a funds rate by next september that’s a full point below the current level, with cuts beginning around march. is this something that you are broadly comfortable with? chair powell. so this last year has been remarkable for the, the sort of seesaw thing, the back-and-forth we’ve had over the course of the year of markets moving away and moving back and that kind of thing. so, and what i would just say is that we, we focus on what we have to do and how we need to use our tools to achieve our goals, and that’s what we really focus on. and people are going to have different forecasts about the economy, and they’re going to—those are going to show up in market conditions, or they won’t, you know. but in any case, we have to do what we think is right. and, you know, in the long run, it’s important that financial conditions become aligned or are aligned with what we’re trying to accomplish, and, in the long run, they will be, of course,  because we will do what it takes to get to our goals. and, ultimately, that will mean that financial conditions will, will come along. but in the meantime, there can be back-and-forth, and, you know, i’m just focused on what’s the right thing for us to do. and my colleagues are focused on that, too. nick timiraos. the markets seem to think inflation is coming down credibly. do you believe we’re at the point where inflation is coming down credibly? chair powell. listen, i welcome the progress. i think it’s, it’s really good to see the progress that we’re making. i think if you look at the 12-month—look at the 6-month measures, you see very low numbers. if you look at 12-month measures, you’re still well above 2 percent. you’re actually above 3 percent on core, through november, pce [inflation]. that isn’t to say— i’m not, you know, calling into question the progress. it’s great. we just need to see more. we need to see, you know, continued further, further progress toward getting back to 2 percent. that’s, that’s what we need to see. so, you know, our—it’s our job to restore price stability. and that—it’s one of our two jobs, along with maximum employment, and they’re equal. so we’re very focused on, on, you know, doing that. as i mentioned, we’re moving carefully at this point. we’re pleased with the progress, but, but we see the need for further progress, and i think—i think it’s fair to say there is a lot of uncertainty about going forward. we’ve seen the economy move in surprising directions, so we’re just going to need to see more further progress. michelle smith. jeanna. jeanna smialek. jeanna smialek, new york times. thanks for taking our questions. in the sep from today, [real gdp] growth is notably below potential in 2024. if growth were to surprise us again in the way that it has for years now by being stronger than  expected next year, would it still be possible to cut rates? or, put another way, is below-trend growth necessary to cut rates, or would continued progress on inflation alone be sufficient? chair powell. so we’ll, we’ll look at the totality of the data. growth is one thing, so is inflation, so is labor market data. so we’d, we’d look at the totality. as we—as we make decisions about policy changes going forward, we’re going to be looking at all those things and, particularly, about the—as they affect the outlook. so it’s ultimately all about the outlook and the balance of risks as well. so that’s what—that’s what we’d be looking for. if we have stronger growth, you know, that’ll be good for people. that’ll be good for the labor market. it might actually mean that it takes a little longer to get inflation down to 2 percent. we will get it down to 2 percent, but, you know, if we see stronger growth, we’ll—we will set policy according to what we actually see. and, and so that’s how i would answer. jeanna smialek. i guess the—i guess the question i’m asking, if you don’t mind a quick follow-up, i guess the question i’m asking is, is above-trend growth itself a problem? chair powell. it’s only a problem inso—it’s not itself a problem. it’s only a problem insofar as it makes it more difficult for us to achieve our goals. and, you know, if you have—if you have growth that’s robust, what that will mean is probably it will keep the labor market very strong. it probably will, will place some upward pressure on inflation. that could mean that it takes longer to get to 2 percent inflation. that could mean we need to keep rates higher for longer. it could even mean, ultimately, that we would need to hike again. it just is— it’s the way, the way our policy works. michelle smith. let’s go to neil. neil irwin. hi, chair powell. neil irwin with axios. how do you interpret the state of the labor market right now? and, in particular, you’ve referred even today to evidence that  it’s coming into better balance. what would you need to see to conclude that it has reached that balance? chair powell. so on, on the better-balance side, there are just a lot of things. it’s— you see—you see job growth still strong but moving back down to more sustainable levels, given population growth and labor force participation. the things that are not quite—but let me go on with that list. you know, claims are low. if you look at surveys of businesses, they’re, they’re— sort of the era of this frantic labor shortage, [those kinds of worker shortages] are behind us, and they’re seeing a shortage of labor as being significantly alleviated. if you look at shortages of workers, whereas they thought job, job availability was the highest that it’d ever been or close to it, that’s now down to more normal levels by so many measures—participation, unemployment—so many measures: the unemployment—job openings, quits, all of those things. so wages are still running a bit above what would be consistent with 2 percent inflation over a long period of time. they’ve been gradually cooling off. but if wages are running around 4 percent, that’s still a bit above, i would say. and i guess there, there are just a couple of other—the unemployment rate is very, very low. and these are—but, but i would just say, overall, the development of the labor market has been very positive. it’s been a good time for workers to find jobs and get solid wage increases. michelle smith. claire. claire jones. claire jones, financial times. you know, i’d say the mood among economists at the moment seems to be one of cautious optimism, which is somewhat corroborated by your forecast by the sense that we are going to have a soft landing. yet when  we—when we hear from the general public, there’s a lot of discord about economic conditions. what do you think explains this disconnect, and does it matter for policymakers? chair powell. it may be. a common theme is that, while inflation is coming down, and that’s very good news, the price level is not coming down. prices of some, some goods and services are coming down. but overall, in the aggregate, the price level is not. so people are still living with high prices, and that’s, that’s not—that is something that people don’t like. and, you know, so what will happen with that is, wages are now—[changes in] real wages are now positive. so [nominal] wages are now moving up more than inflation, as inflation comes down. and so that might help improve the mood of people. but we do see those—we see those public opinion surveys. the thing that we can do is to do our jobs, which is to use our tools to foster price stability, which has such great benefits over such long periods of time, and which is the thing that really enables us to work for and achieve an extended period of high employment, which is so beneficial for, you know, families and, and companies around the country. michelle smith. victoria. victoria guida. hi. victoria guida with politico. i wanted to ask, you know, on, on the flip side of if things start to deteriorate rapidly, if we do fall into a recession, if we do start to see unemployment rise, at sort of the levels of inflation that we’re seeing now, how would you all think about that in terms of rate cuts? would that be a sign that you’ve, you’ve done your job demand-wise? chair powell. sorry—if? victoria guida. if, if the economy starts to—looks like it’s starting to fall into a recession; if, if the jobless rate starts to rise.  chair powell. that’s not something we’re hoping to see. obviously, we’re hoping to, to see something very different—which is a continuation of what we have seen, which is the labor market coming into better balance without a significant increase in unemployment, inflation coming down without a significant increase in unemployment, and growth moderating without a significant increase in unemployment. that’s what we’re, we’re trying very much to achieve and not something that we’re looking to see. victoria guida. but, but would you take that as a signal that you should cut rates? chair powell. you know, obviously, what we’ll do is we’ll look at the totality of the data, as i’ve mentioned a couple times, and, certainly, the labor data would be important in that. and, you know, if you—if you can describe a situation like that where if, if there were the beginning of a recession or something like that, then, yes, that would certainly weigh heavily on that decision. michelle smith. michael mckee. michael mckee. michael mckee from bloomberg television and radio. mr. chairman, you were, by your own admission, behind the curve in starting to raise rates to fight inflation, and you said earlier, again, “the full effects of our tightening (cycle) have not yet been felt.” how will you decide when to cut rates, and how will you ensure you’re not behind the curve there? chair powell. so we’re, we’re aware of the risk that we would hang on too long. you know, we know that that’s a risk, and we’re very focused on not making that mistake. and we do regard the two—you know, we’ve come back into a better balance between the risk of overdoing it and the risk of underdoing it. not only that, we were able to focus hard on the—on the price-stability mandate. and we’re getting back to the point where—which is what you do  when you’re very far from, from one of them, one of the two mandates—you’re getting now back to the point where both mandates are important, and they’re, they’re more in balance, too. so i think we’ll be—we’ll be very much keeping that in mind, as we make policy going forward. and the things we’ll be looking at, i’ve already described. you know, we’re, we’re obviously looking hard at what’s happening with demand, and what we see? we see the same thing other people see, which is a strong economy, which really put up quite a performance in 2023. we see good evidence and good reason to believe that growth will come in lower next year. and you see what the forecasts are. i think the median growth—median participant wrote down 1.4 percent growth, but, you know, we’ll have to see. it’s very hard to predict. we’ll also be looking to see progress on inflation and, you know, the labor market remaining strong but, but ideally, without seeing the kind of large increase in unemployment that happens sometimes. michael mckee. if i could follow up: when you begin the cutting cycle, will it be essentially run the same way you do it now with raising rates, where you basically do trial and error, cut and see what happens, or will you tie it to some particular measure of progress? chair powell. we haven’t typically tried to articulate, with one exception, really specific target levels, which was if you—some of you will remember the thresholds that we used in, i guess, 2013. i don’t—the answer is, these are things that we haven’t, you know, really worked out yet. we’re sort of just at the beginning of, of that discussion. michelle smith. edward. edward lawrence. thank you, mr. chairman. edward lawrence of fox business. so if the fed cuts rates as the dot plot is, is showing, about 75 basis points, does that signal that there’s a belief of weakness next year in the economy?  chair powell. it wouldn’t, if that were to—first of all, let me just say, that isn’t a plan. that’s, that’s just cumulating what people wrote down. so that’s not something—you know this, but allow me to say it again: we don’t debate or discuss what the right, you know, whose sep is right. we just say what they are, and we tabulate them and publish them. so and it’s, you know, it’s important for people to know that. but it wouldn’t need to be a sign of—it could just be a sign that the economy is normalizing, and it doesn’t need the tight policy. it depends on—the economy can evolve in many different ways, right? so but, but it could be more of what i just described. edward lawrence. and you focused on core inflation, we’ve heard from—in other meetings. how sticky is core inflation right now? chair powell. well, that’s what we’re finding out, and we’ve, you know, we’ve seen real progress in, in core inflation. it has been sticky, and famously, the service sector is thought to be stickier, but we’ve actually seen reasonable progress in nonhousing services, which was the area where, where you would expect to see less progress. we are seeing some progress there, though. and, in fact, all three of the categories of core [prices] are now contributing: goods, housing services, nonhousing services. they’re all contributing in different—at different levels, you know, meeting by meeting—or, rather, report by report. so, yeah. michelle smith. okay. let’s go to catarina. catarina saraiva. catarina saraiva of bloomberg news. thanks for taking our questions. i just wanted to ask a little bit about, you know, we had some pretty positive data this, you know, this morning and yesterday. i’m assuming those were not incorporated into the forecast we see today, but i just wanted to ask, you know, how that kind of adds to your thinking, you know, on the inflation outlook.  chair powell. right. so we got—we got cpi the morning of the first day, and we got ppi the next day, which informs the, you know, the translation into pce [inflation]. so it’s very late in the game, you know, to—but nonetheless, participants are allowed to, encouraged to update their sep forecast until probably midmorning today. after that, so staff has to—has to cumulate all of that and create the documents that you see. so until about midmorning, a little, maybe late morning, it’s okay to update, and i believe some people did update their forecast based on what we saw today. catarina saraiva. okay. and do you see—i mean, how are you, when you think about, you know, starting to think about the rate cuts next year or whenever they come, how do you, you know, how do you think about the economy we’re in now kind of post-pandemic? do you think that there’s been significant structural shifts, and is that going to change how you look at a rate cut path? chair powell. the question of whether there have been fundamental structural shifts is, is really hard to know the answer and a very interesting one right now. the one that would affect—the one that comes to mind, though, is just the question of where the neutral rate of interest is. and so, for example, if it’s risen, and i’m not saying that it has, but if it were to have risen, that would mean that, that interest rates would need to be a little bit higher to convey the same level of restriction. the thing is, we’re not really going to know that. you know, people will be writing papers about that 10 years from now and still fighting about it. so it’s just that it’s going to be uncertain. so we’re going to be making policy in this, you know, difficult, uncertain, really unprecedented environment. some—someone once said that you know the—you know the natural rate of interest by its works, and that’s really right, but that’s very difficult because policy  operates with a lag. so that’s one of the reasons why we slowed down this year. we started slowing down at this meeting last year, reducing the pace at which we were adding restriction. and, over the course of this year, we really slowed down a lot to give those lags time to work. in terms of demand, has demand shifted more away from services into goods? there’s— you can make a case for that, that the shift back into services has not been complete, and it doesn’t look like it’s ongoing, but i don’t know if that’s right. maybe people just bought so much stuff that they temporarily don’t want any more stuff. they haven’t got anyplace to put it. [laughter] michelle smith. let’s go to jennifer. jennifer schonberger. thank you, chair powell. jennifer schonberger with yahoo finance. you said back in july that you needed to start cutting rates before getting to 2 percent inflation. as you mentioned, pce inflation is now running at 3½ on core. on a six- month annual basis, core pce is running at 2½ percent, though when you look at supercore and shelter, they are, of course, stickier. so when looking in the different components of the data, how much closer do you have to get to 2 percent before you consider cutting rates? chair powell. i mean, the reason you wouldn’t wait to get to 2 percent to cut rates is that policy would be, it would be too late. i mean, you’d want to be reducing restriction on the economy well before 2 percent because—or before you get to 2 percent so you don’t overshoot, if we think, think of restrictive policy as weighing on economic activity. you know, it takes—it takes a while for policy to get into the economy, affect economic activity, and affect inflation. so i can’t give you a precise answer. but if you look at what’s in the—in the sep, and, you know, i think you’ll see a reasonable estimate of the time lags and things like that that it would take.  jennifer schonberger. do think below 3 percent would be reasonable? chair powell. i wouldn’t want to—i wouldn’t want to identify any one precise point, because i would be able to look back then and probably find out that it turned out not to be right. but we’ll be looking at it and, and looking at the broad collection of factors. michelle smith. let’s go to jean yung. jean yung. hi, chair powell. jean yung with market news. i wanted to go back to the stickiness-of-inflation question. over the past couple of years, a lot of central bankers have talked about the more difficult last mile of getting inflation back down to 2 percent, yet it’s also been surprising how fast inflation has come down this year. i’m curious, do you think something has changed in our understanding of inflation, or do you subscribe to this notion still? or is it something different about the u.s. economy? thank you. chair powell. i think—i think this. you know, we felt since the beginning that it would be a combination of two factors. the first factor is just the unwinding of, of what happened in the pandemic: the distortions of supply and demand. and the second thing would be our policy, which was weighing on aggregate demand and actually making it easier for the supply side to recover because of lower demand. we thought those two things were going to be necessary. sorry, say your—say the last part of your question again. jean yung. if there was something different about the u.s. economy. chair powell. yeah. so it’s not that—it may or may not be about “different,” the u.s. economy being different. i think that this inflation was not the classic demand overload, pot-boiling-over, kind of inflation that we [typically] think about. it was a combination of very strong demand, without question, and unusual supply-side restrictions, both on the goods side but  also on the labor side, because we had a—we had a participation shock. so this is just very unusual. and, you know, we had the view—my colleagues and i broadly had the view—that we could get a lot of—you know, you had essentially a vertical supply curve, because you ran into the limits of, of capacity at very low levels, because there weren’t workers and because people couldn’t—the supply chains were all broken. so we, we had the view that you could come straight down that vertical supply curve to the extent demand [was] lowered, reduced. and, you know, something like that has happened. it happened so far. the question is, you know, once, once that part of it runs out—and we think it has a ways to run; we definitely think that the sort of supply chain and shortages side has some, some ways to run—does labor force participation have much more to run? it might. immigration could help, but it may be that, at some point—at some point, you will run out of supply-side help, and then it gets down to demand, and it gets harder. that’s, that’s very possible. but to say with certainty that the last mile is going to be different, i’d be reluctant to, you know, to suggest that we have any certainty around that. we just don’t know. i mean, inflation keeps coming down. the labor market keeps getting back into balance. and it’s so far, so good—although we kind of assume that it will get harder from here. but so far, it hasn’t. michelle smith. okay. we’ll go to megan for the last question. megan cassella. hi, chair powell. thanks for taking our questions. megan cassella with barron’s. i want to ask about the balance sheet given the fed’s focus now on proceeding carefully and considering rate cuts. and can you talk us through what the latest thinking is, and has there been any consideration of altering the pace of quantitative tightening at all?  chair powell. we’re, we’re not talking about altering the pace of qt right now, just to get that out of the way. so the balance sheet seems to be working pretty much as expected. what we’ve been seeing is, you know, that we’re allowing runoff each month. that’s adding up. i think we’re down—we’re close to 1.2 trillion [dollars]. that’s showing up. the reverse repo facility [take- up] has been coming down quickly, and reserves have been either moving up or—as a result—or holding steady. at a certain point, you know, there won’t be any more to come out of, or there’ll be a level where [take-up at] the reverse repo facility levels out. and, at that point, reserves will start to come down. you know, we still have—you know that we intend to reduce our securities holdings until we judge that the quantity of reserve balances has reached a level somewhat above that consistent with ample reserves, and we also intend to slow and then stop the decline in size of the balance sheet when reserve balances are somewhat above the level judged to be consistent with ample reserves. we’re not at those levels, you know, with, with reserves close to 3.5 trillion [dollars]. we’re not—we don’t think we’re at those [levels judged consistent with ample] reserves. there isn’t a lot of evidence of that. we’re watching it carefully. and, you know, so far—so far, it’s working pretty much as expected, we think. megan cassella. do you anticipate adjusting that thinking at all by the time you’re, you’re considering or moving forward with rate cuts? is that time to rethink, or are you still going to follow that thinking? chair powell. so i think they’re, they’re on independent tracks. you’re asking, though, the question, i guess you’re implying the question of can you continue with qt at such time—qt, which is a tightening action—at such time as policy is still tight? and the answer is,  it depends on the reason. you know, if you’re—if you’re—if you’re cutting rates because you’re going back to normal, that’s one thing, [and distinct from] if you’re cutting them because the economy is really weak. so you can imagine, you’d have to know what the reason is to know whether it would be appropriate to do those two things at the same time. michelle smith. thank you. chair powell. thanks very much.   NA
NA developments in financial markets and open market operations. 3 attended through the discussion of the economic and financial situation. page 2 federal open market committee  jon faust, senior special adviser to the chair, division of board members, board achilles sangster ii, senior information manager, division of monetary affairs, board glenn follette, associate director, division of research and statistics, board adam h. shapiro, vice president, federal reserve bank of san francisco joseph w. gruber, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of kansas city shane m. sherlund, associate director, division of research and statistics, board valerie s. hinojosa, section chief, division of monetary affairs, board nitish ranjan sinha, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board jasper j. hoek, deputy associate director, division of international finance, board balint szoke, senior economist, division of monetary affairs, board jane e. ihrig, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board giorgio topa, economic research advisor, federal reserve bank of new york elizabeth klee, senior associate director, division of financial stability, board clara vega, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board david e. lebow, senior associate director, division of research and statistics, board annette vissing-jørgensen, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board andreas lehnert, director, division of financial stability, board jeffrey d. walker,2 associate director, division of reserve bank operations and payment systems, board eric lesueur,2 policy and market analysis advisor, federal reserve bank of new york kurt f. lewis, special adviser to the chair, division of board members, board laura lipscomb, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board david lópez-salido, senior associate director, division of monetary affairs, board thomas lubik, senior advisor, federal reserve bank of richmond byron lutz, deputy associate director, division of research and statistics, board mark meder, first vice president, federal reserve bank of cleveland ann e. misback, secretary, office of the secretary, board michelle m. neal, head of markets, federal reserve bank of new york edward nelson, senior adviser, division of monetary affairs, board lubomir petrasek, 4 section chief, division of monetary affairs, board 4 attended tuesday’s session only. paul r. wood, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board egon zakrajsek, executive vice president, federal reserve bank of boston rebecca zarutskie, special adviser to the board, division of board members, board developments in financial markets and open market operations the manager turned first to a review of developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. financial conditions eased, driven by a decline in interest rates, an increase in equity prices, and a depreciation in the dollar. the rise in equity prices was supported by the decline in treasury yields and by earnings growth that exceeded consensus expectations. implied volatility for equities diminished notably. the easing in financial conditions reversed some of the tightening that occurred over the summer and much of the fall. yields on nominal treasury securities declined sharply over the intermeeting period—more so at longer maturities—after having increased notably during the previous intermeeting period, as investors appeared to interpret incoming data as reducing risks of prolonged inflation pressures. in addition, market participants interpreted communications from fomc participants as solidifying minutes of the meeting of december 12–13, 2023 page 3  the view that the committee’s policy rate may be at its peak. early in the period, the market also reacted to communications from the treasury department indicating that issuance of treasury securities was likely to be more skewed toward shorter-dated maturities than previously expected. models, on average, suggested that about two-thirds of the decline in longer-term yields on treasury securities over the period was attributable to a reduction in term premiums and about one-third to a decline in expectations for the policy rate. pricing of inflation derivatives over the intermeeting period suggested that investors had become more optimistic about the near-term outlook for inflation. the manager turned next to expectations for monetary policy. respondents to the open market desk’s survey of primary dealers and survey of market participants largely converged around the view that the peak level of the federal funds rate for this tightening cycle had been reached. the modal path from the desk surveys suggested that the first reduction in the policy rate would occur in june, unchanged from the october surveys. the average path for the policy rate implied by market pricing shifted down considerably over the period. regarding developments in money markets and desk operations, usage of the overnight reverse repurchase agreement (on rrp) facility continued to fall over the period; take-up at the facility had dropped about $1.3 trillion since early june. the decline was again driven primarily by lower participation by money market mutual funds, as such funds found it more attractive to invest in treasury bills and, increasingly, the private market for repurchase agreement (repo) transactions. overnight repo rates continued to experience some modest upward pressure over the period. as reflected by a rise in the secured overnight financing rate, there was some tightening of conditions in repo markets in late november and early december in response to typical lending dynamics around month-end, the settlement of a large amount of treasury issuance, and increased demand for treasury financing. the market absorbed this episode well. the manager expected that private-market repo rates would likely remain above the rate offered at the on rrp facility, which should continue to induce a reduction in usage of the facility. respondents to the desk surveys again reduced their expectations for the trajectory for on rrp balances and correspondingly raised their expectations for the trajectory of reserve balances. aggregate reserves across the banking system remained abundant, and no signs of pressures were evident. as part of their ongoing market surveillance, the staff will continue to monitor a wide range of indicators of money market conditions, including the composition of borrowers in money markets, borrowing demand for various sources of liquidity, the distribution of reserve balances across the financial system, the pricing of money market investments relative to the federal reserve’s administered rates, and the sensitivity of money market rates to changes in aggregate reserves. by unanimous vote, the committee ratified the desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. there were no intervention operations in foreign currencies for the system’s account during the intermeeting period. staff review of the economic situation the data available at the time of the december 12–13 meeting suggested that growth in u.s. real gross domestic product (gdp) was slowing from its strong thirdquarter pace. labor market conditions continued to be tight, with moderating but still-strong job gains and a low unemployment rate. consumer price inflation had eased over the past year but remained elevated. labor demand and supply continued to move gradually into better alignment. total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a slower pace, on balance, over october and november than its average monthly rate in the third quarter. the unemployment rate was little changed, on net, and stood at 3.7 percent in november, the same as its third-quarter average. the labor force participation rate was essentially flat over the past two months, remaining above its level early in the year, while the employment-to-population ratio rose slightly on balance. the unemployment rates for african americans and for hispanics were little changed, and both rates were higher than those for asians and for whites. the job openings rate continued to trend down, and the quits rate was flat; both rates were below their levels earlier this year. the lessening of labor market imbalances was apparent in recent wage data, as the 12-month change in average hourly earnings for all employees was well below its year-earlier level and the wage growth tracker constructed by the federal reserve bank of atlanta was trending down and lower than a year ago. consumer price inflation remained elevated but continued to show notable signs of easing. the price index for total personal consumption expenditures (pce) increased 3.0 percent over the 12 months ending in october, while core pce inflation—which excludes changes in energy prices and many consumer food prices—was 3.5 percent over the same period; both total and core page 4 federal open market committee  pce inflation were well below their year-earlier levels. the six-month change measures of total and core pce inflation in october were each 2.5 percent, down from their levels six months earlier. the trimmed mean measure of 12-month pce inflation constructed by the federal reserve bank of dallas was 3.6 percent in october, also down from its level a year ago. in november, the 12-month change in the consumer price index (cpi) was 3.1 percent, core cpi rose 4.0 percent over the same period, and both measures were well below their year-earlier levels. recent survey measures of medium- to longer-term inflation expectations were in the range seen in the decade before the pandemic. in contrast, survey measures of consumers’ short-run inflation expectations remained above their pre-pandemic levels. available indicators suggested that real gdp growth was slowing from its strong third-quarter pace, which had been led by a sizable increase in consumer spending. in october, pce growth slowed from its average monthly rate in the third quarter. as for business investment, nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft were essentially flat in october, although nonresidential construction spending by businesses edged up. residential housing starts moved mostly sideways, and home sales continued to fall. manufacturing production declined in october, and factory output was weak, even after excluding the decrease in motor vehicle assemblies caused by the autoworkers’ strike. the nominal trade deficit widened in october, as exports declined and imports rose slightly. foreign economic growth slowed in the third quarter, and available indicators pointed to subdued growth in the fourth quarter. the significant tightening of monetary policy by foreign central banks over the past two years and the repercussions of last year’s energy shock in europe continued to weigh on foreign economic activity. chinese economic indicators, such as retail sales and industrial production, pointed to economic growth remaining modest. by contrast, economic activity in asia excluding china stepped up, supported in part by a recovery in industrial production, especially in the hightech sector. while inflation was still elevated in most major economies, incoming data indicated that it had moved down markedly. these decreases reflected notable step-downs in both energy and core inflation amid slowing aggregate demand and declines in oil prices. most major foreign central banks kept their policy rates unchanged over the intermeeting period and emphasized the need to maintain a sufficiently restrictive stance of policy to ensure that inflation fell back to their targets. staff review of the financial situation over the intermeeting period, some softer-than-expected data releases appeared to lessen the perception among investors that policy may need to tighten further in order to bring inflation down to 2 percent over time. market participants also viewed monetary policy communications, on balance, as pointing to somewhat less restrictive policy than expected. as a result, nominal treasury yields declined significantly and the expected market-implied path for the federal funds rate beyond the next few months shifted downward. meanwhile, broad equity price indexes were boosted by many of the same factors that lowered treasury yields, and spreads on investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds narrowed. financing conditions remained moderately restrictive, as borrowing costs remained elevated despite declining over the intermeeting period. the market-implied path for the federal funds rate beyond the next few months moved down notably over the intermeeting period. a straight read of federal funds futures rates suggested that market participants expected the federal funds rate to be 25 basis points below its current level by the may 2024 fomc meeting, two meetings earlier than at the time of the october–november fomc meeting. the policy rate path implied by overnight index swap quotes moved down 45 basis points to 4.2 percent by the end of 2024. similarly, nominal treasury yields declined significantly. the decline in nominal yields mostly reflected a decrease in real yields, while measures of inflation compensation were moderately lower, on net, amid softer-than-expected data releases. measures of uncertainty about the path of interest rates decreased notably, consistent with the tempering of concerns about inflation, but remained elevated by historical standards. broad stock price indexes increased markedly over the intermeeting period, and spreads on investment-grade bonds narrowed moderately, while those on speculativegrade corporate bonds declined more notably. the onemonth option-implied volatility on the s&p 500 decreased moderately and reached its lowest level since january 2020. spillovers from falling u.s. yields, below-expectations readings on global inflation, and oil price drops led to large declines in foreign yields. these declines were accompanied by an improvement in market sentiment, with foreign equity prices increasing, foreign credit minutes of the meeting of december 12–13, 2023 page 5  spreads narrowing, and outflows from funds investing in emerging market economies slowing notably. the improvement in sentiment and declines in u.s. yields contributed to a broad depreciation of the foreign exchange value of the dollar. conditions in u.s. short-term funding markets remained largely stable over the intermeeting period. usage of the on rrp facility continued to decline over the period. the decline in usage primarily reflected money market mutual funds reallocating their assets to treasury bills and private-market repo, which offered slightly more attractive market rates relative to the on rrp rate amid continued increases in net treasury bill issuance and federal reserve balance sheet reduction. banks’ total deposit levels were roughly unchanged over the intermeeting period, as outflows of core deposits were about offset by inflows of large time deposits. in domestic credit markets, borrowing costs for most businesses, households, and municipalities declined over the intermeeting period, reflecting both lower longermaturity treasury yields and narrower credit spreads, although borrowing costs remained significantly elevated. rates on loans to households, including those for 30-year conforming residential mortgages and new auto loans, declined over the intermeeting period, while interest rates on commercial and industrial (c&i) loans and small business loans were little changed. yields on corporate bonds fell more than treasury yields, particularly for speculative-grade bonds. bank credit conditions appeared to tighten somewhat over the intermeeting period, but credit to businesses and households generally remained accessible. c&i loan balances contracted through november, on balance, while expansion of commercial real estate (cre) loans stepped down appreciably across most categories from an already moderating pace in the third quarter. credit remained available for most consumers, although consumer credit flows softened in recent months. growth of credit card balances moderated significantly through november from the brisk pace seen in the summer. for residential real estate borrowers, credit availability was little changed. credit conditions for small businesses appeared to have tightened further in recent months. data from the federal reserve’s small business lending survey showed that originations had been roughly flat since mid-2022 before ticking down in the third quarter. credit continued to be generally accessible through capital markets, although issuance was slow in many markets, including those for corporate bonds, leveraged loans, and agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-based securities (cmbs). credit quality remained broadly solid but deteriorated further for some sectors in recent months. delinquency rates on nonfarm nonresidential cre bank loans rose further in the third quarter, and delinquency rates for construction and land development as well as multifamily loans ticked up. after increases over the first three quarters of the year, delinquency rates for loans in cmbs pools edged lower in october, but the large volume of loans scheduled to mature over the next few quarters suggested that delinquencies would likely surge again. the delinquency rate for small business loans continued to tick up in september and was above levels observed just before the pandemic. credit card delinquency rates also increased further, while delinquency rates on auto loans were little changed in the third quarter. the trailing default rates for investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds were little changed on net, and the trailing default rate for leveraged loans increased a bit. staff economic outlook the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the december meeting was broadly similar to the projection for the previous meeting. the staff continued to expect that gdp growth would slow markedly in the fourth quarter from its outsized third-quarter rate but that economic growth for 2023 as a whole would still be solid. the lagged effects of earlier monetary policy actions, through their contributions to continued tight financial and credit conditions, were expected to show through more fully in restraining economic activity in the coming years. real gdp was projected to increase more slowly than the staff’s estimate of potential over the next two years before rising in line with potential in 2026. the unemployment rate was expected to be roughly flat through 2026 as the effects of below-potential output growth were offset by the effects of further improvements in labor market functioning. the staff revised down their inflation forecast, reflecting lower-than-expected incoming data—including the november cpi and producer price index—and their judgment that inflation would be less persistent than in the previous projection. measured on a four-quarter change basis, total pce price inflation was expected to be somewhat below 3 percent this year, with core pce price inflation somewhat above 3 percent. inflation was projected to move lower in coming years as demand and supply in product and labor markets moved into better page 6 federal open market committee  alignment; by 2026, total and core pce price inflation were expected to be close to 2 percent. the staff continued to view uncertainty around the baseline projection as elevated, although they observed that the volatility of incoming data and staff forecast errors generally had become less pronounced over the past year. risks around the inflation forecast were seen as skewed to the upside, given that inflation was still elevated and the possibility that inflation might prove to be more persistent than expected or that adverse shocks to supply conditions might occur. the risks around the forecast for economic activity were viewed to be tilted to the downside. in particular, the additional monetary policy tightening that could be put in place if upside inflation risks were to materialize, with the potential for a greater tightening of financial conditions, represented a downside risk to the projection for economic activity. participants’ views on current conditions and the economic outlook in conjunction with this fomc meeting, participants submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for real gdp growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2023 through 2026 and over the longer run. the projections were based on their individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, including the path of the federal funds rate. the longer-run projections represented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. a summary of economic projections (sep) was released to the public following the conclusion of the meeting. in their discussion of current economic conditions, participants observed that after stronger than expected growth of real gdp in the third quarter, recent indicators suggested that growth in economic activity had slowed. while still strong, job gains had moderated since earlier this year, and the unemployment rate had remained low. participants observed that inflation had eased over the past year but remained elevated and above the committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent. regarding the economic outlook, participants generally judged that, in 2024, real gdp growth would cool and that rebalancing of the labor market would continue, with the unemployment rate rising somewhat from its current level. based on better-than-expected data on inflation, participants revised down their inflation projections for 2023 and, to a lesser extent, in subsequent years. participants judged that the current stance of monetary policy was restrictive and appeared to be restraining economic activity and inflation. in light of the policy restraint in place, along with more favorable data on inflation, participants generally viewed risks to inflation and employment as moving toward greater balance. however, participants remained highly attentive to inflation risks. in their discussion of inflation, all participants observed that clear progress had been made in 2023 toward the committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. they remained concerned that elevated inflation continued to harm households, especially those with limited means to absorb higher prices. participants observed that inflation remained above the committee’s objective and that they would need to see more evidence that inflation pressures were abating to become confident in a sustained return of inflation to 2 percent. in reviewing progress to date in reducing inflation, participants noted the improvement in both headline and core inflation and discussed the developments in components of these aggregate measures. they observed that progress had been uneven across components, with energy and core goods prices falling or changing little recently, but core services prices still increasing at an elevated pace. several participants observed that the ongoing rebalancing of labor supply and demand would help reduce core services inflation. several participants assessed that housing services inflation would fall further over time as the earlier deceleration in rents on new leases continued to pass through to broader rent measures. participants also discussed the role played by various supply and demand factors in the progress on reducing inflation thus far. they assessed that the contribution of improved supply had come from supply chain normalization, boosts to labor supply due to a higher labor force participation rate and immigration, better productivity growth, or increased domestic oil production. they also noted that restrictive monetary policy had helped restrain growth of demand, particularly in interest-sensitive sectors such as business fixed investment, housing, and autos and other durable goods. several participants assessed that healing in supply chains and labor supply was largely complete, and therefore that continued progress in reducing inflation may need to come mainly from further softening in product and labor demand, with restrictive monetary policy continuing to play a central role. a few others saw potential for further improvements in supply. several participants noted that longer-term inflation expectations remained well anchored and that near-term inflation expectations of households had declined recently. minutes of the meeting of december 12–13, 2023 page 7  in their comments about the household sector, participants observed that consumer spending had been strong, supported by the healthy balance sheets of many households, a strong labor market, and robust income growth. retail sales growth had stepped down noticeably in october, though a few participants remarked that contacts reported strong sales in november, notably related to holiday spending. participants mentioned several factors that may contribute to softer consumer spending, including slower growth of labor income and diminishing pandemic-related excess savings. relatedly, many participants noted increased usage of credit by households, including from credit cards, buy-now-paylater borrowing, and payday loans, as well as increased delinquency rates for many types of consumer loans. reports from participants’ business-sector contacts were mixed, with some contacts remaining relatively optimistic and others expecting slower growth for 2024. several participants observed that higher interest rates were leading firms to reassess future projects and were contributing to softer business investment and hiring. a couple of participants commented on small businesses, noting that such businesses were experiencing tighter credit conditions and increasing delinquencies. a few participants noted that contacts in manufacturing reported slowing growth, while a couple of participants expected that low prices for some commodities and drought conditions would reduce agricultural incomes this year. regarding concerns about cre, several participants noted that a significant share of properties would need to be refinanced in 2024 against a backdrop of higher interest rates, continued weakness in the office sector, and balance sheet pressures faced by some lenders. participants assessed that while the labor market remained tight, it continued to come into better balance. many noted that nominal wage growth had continued to slow broadly and that business contacts expected a further reduction in wage growth. a few participants observed that payroll growth had slowed substantially since the beginning of the year. some participants remarked that their contacts reported larger applicant pools for vacancies, and some participants highlighted that the ratio of vacancies to unemployed workers had declined to a value only modestly above its level just before the pandemic. participants viewed improvements in labor supply and the easing of labor demand as both having contributed to the labor market coming into better balance. supply had improved because of higher labor force participation and immigration, with continued solid productivity growth also supporting the productive capacity of the economy. as evidence for the softening of the growth of labor demand during 2023, many participants noted the decline in job openings, and a few remarked on the lower quits rate. several participants noted the risk that, if labor demand were to weaken substantially further, the labor market could transition quickly from a gradual easing to a more abrupt downshift in conditions. participants generally perceived a high degree of uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook. as an upside risk to both inflation and economic activity, participants noted that the momentum of economic activity may be stronger than currently assessed, possibly on account of the continued balance sheet strength of many households. furthermore, participants observed that, after a sharp tightening since the summer, financial conditions had eased over the intermeeting period. many participants remarked that an easing in financial conditions beyond what is appropriate could make it more difficult for the committee to reach its inflation goal. participants also noted other sources of upside risks to inflation, including possible effects on global energy and food prices of geopolitical developments, a potential rebound in core goods prices following the period of supply chain improvements, or the effects of nearshoring and onshoring activities on labor demand and inflation. downside risks to economic activity noted by participants included the possibility that effects of past policy tightening may be larger than expected, the risk of a marked weakening of household balance sheets, possible negative spillovers from lower growth in some foreign economies, geopolitical risks, and lingering risks of further tightening in bank credit. relatedly, several participants noted that the weakness in gross domestic income growth relative to gdp growth over the past few quarters may suggest that economic momentum during that period was not as strong as indicated by the gdp readings. in their consideration of appropriate monetary policy actions at this meeting, participants noted that recent indicators suggested that growth of economic activity had slowed from its strong pace in the third quarter. job gains had moderated since earlier in the year but remained strong, the unemployment rate had remained low, and there were continuing signs that supply and demand in the labor market were coming into better balance. inflation had eased over the past year but remained elevated. participants also noted that tighter financial and credit conditions facing households and businesses would likely weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation, although the extent of these effects page 8 federal open market committee  remained uncertain. participants continued to be resolute in their commitment to bring inflation down to the committee’s 2 percent objective. in light of current economic conditions and their implications for the outlook for economic activity and inflation, as well as the balance of risks, all participants judged it appropriate to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent at this meeting. all participants also agreed that it was appropriate to continue the process of reducing the federal reserve’s securities holdings, as described in the previously announced plans for reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet. participants assessed that maintaining the current policy stance was supported by intermeeting data indicating that inflation had continued to move toward the committee’s 2 percent objective and that the labor market had continued to move into better balance. they judged that maintaining the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting would promote further progress toward the committee’s goals and allow participants more time to gather additional information to evaluate this progress. in discussing the policy outlook, participants viewed the policy rate as likely at or near its peak for this tightening cycle, though they noted that the actual policy path will depend on how the economy evolves. participants pointed to the decline in inflation seen during 2023, noting the recent shift down in six-month inflation readings in particular, and to growing signs of demand and supply coming into better balance in product and labor markets as informing that view. several participants remarked that the committee’s past policy actions were having their intended effect of helping to slow the growth of aggregate demand and cool labor market conditions. they judged that, in combination with improvements in the supply situation, these developments were helping to bring inflation back to 2 percent over time. most participants noted that, as indicated in their submissions to the sep, they expected the committee’s restrictive policy stance to continue to soften household and business spending, helping to promote further reductions in inflation over the next few years. in their submitted projections, almost all participants indicated that, reflecting the improvements in their inflation outlooks, their baseline projections implied that a lower target range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate by the end of 2024. participants also noted, however, that their outlooks were associated with an unusually elevated degree of uncertainty and that it was possible that the economy could evolve in a manner that would make further increases in the target range appropriate. several also observed that circumstances might warrant keeping the target range at its current value for longer than they currently anticipated. participants generally stressed the importance of maintaining a careful and data-dependent approach to making monetary policy decisions and reaffirmed that it would be appropriate for policy to remain at a restrictive stance for some time until inflation was clearly moving down sustainably toward the committee’s objective. participants discussed several risk-management considerations that could bear on future policy decisions. participants saw upside risks to inflation as having diminished but noted that inflation was still well above the committee’s longer-run goal and that a risk remained that progress toward price stability would stall. a number of participants highlighted the uncertainty associated with how long a restrictive monetary policy stance would need to be maintained, and pointed to the downside risks to the economy that would be associated with an overly restrictive stance. a few suggested that the committee potentially could face a tradeoff between its dualmandate goals in the period ahead. participants observed that the continuing process of reducing the size of the federal reserve’s balance sheet was an important part of the committee’s overall approach to achieving its macroeconomic objectives and that balance sheet runoff had so far proceeded smoothly. several participants noted that, amid the ongoing balance sheet normalization, there had been a further decline over the intermeeting period in use of the on rrp facility and that this reduced usage largely reflected portfolio shifts by money market mutual funds toward higher-yielding investments, including treasury bills and private-market repo. several participants remarked that the committee’s balance sheet plans indicated that it would slow and then stop the decline in the size of the balance sheet when reserve balances are somewhat above the level judged consistent with ample reserves. these participants suggested that it would be appropriate for the committee to begin to discuss the technical factors that would guide a decision to slow the pace of runoff well before such a decision was reached in order to provide appropriate advance notice to the public. committee policy actions in their discussions of monetary policy for this meeting, members agreed that recent indicators suggested that growth of economic activity had slowed from its strong pace in the third quarter. job gains had moderated since minutes of the meeting of december 12–13, 2023 page 9  earlier in the year but remained strong, and the unemployment rate had remained low. inflation had eased over the past year but remained elevated. members concurred that the u.s. banking system was sound and resilient. they also agreed that tighter financial and credit conditions for households and businesses were likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation but that the extent of these effects was uncertain. members agreed that they remained highly attentive to inflation risks. in support of the committee’s objective to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run, members agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent. they also agreed that they would continue to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent of any additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, members concurred that they would take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, members agreed to continue to reduce the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. all members affirmed their strong commitment to returning inflation to their 2 percent objective. members agreed that, in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, they would continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. they would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. members also agreed that their assessments would take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. members agreed that their postmeeting statement should acknowledge the slowing of economic activity from its strong pace in the third quarter as well as the fact that inflation had eased over the past year but remained elevated. members also agreed to modify the sentence in their postmeeting statement discussing the considerations relevant for future policy actions to indicate that the committee would determine “the extent of any additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time.” members gen- erally viewed the addition of the word “any” to this sentence as appropriately relaying their judgment that the target range for the federal funds rate was likely now at or near its peak for this policy tightening cycle while leaving open the possibility of further increases in the target range if these were warranted by the totality of the incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. at the conclusion of the discussion, the committee voted to direct the federal reserve bank of new york, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the system open market account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive, for release at 2:00 p.m.: “effective december 14, 2023, the federal open market committee directs the desk to: • undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 5¼ to 5½ percent. • conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid rate of 5.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. • conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering rate of 5.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per day. • roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $60 billion per month. redeem treasury coupon securities up to this monthly cap and treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap. • reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (mbs) the amount of principal payments from the federal reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency mbs received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. • allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. page 10 federal open market committee  • engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the federal reserve’s agency mbs transactions.” the vote also encompassed approval of the statement below for release at 2:00 p.m.: “recent indicators suggest that growth of economic activity has slowed from its strong pace in the third quarter. job gains have moderated since earlier in the year but remain strong, and the unemployment rate has remained low. inflation has eased over the past year but remains elevated. the u.s. banking system is sound and resilient. tighter financial and credit conditions for households and businesses are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation. the extent of these effects remains uncertain. the committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks. the committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 2 percent over the longer run. in support of these goals, the committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 5¼ to 5½ percent. the committee will continue to assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy. in determining the extent of any additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial developments. in addition, the committee will continue reducing its holdings of treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously announced plans. the committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the committee will continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. the committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the committee’s goals. the committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.” voting for this action: jerome h. powell, john c. williams, michael s. barr, michelle w. bowman, lisa d. cook, austan d. goolsbee, patrick harker, philip n. jefferson, neel kashkari, adriana d. kugler, lorie k. logan, and christopher j. waller. voting against this action: none. consistent with the committee’s decision to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 5.4 percent, effective december 14, 2023. the board of governors of the federal reserve system voted unanimously to approve the establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level of 5.5 percent, effective december 14, 2023. it was agreed that the next meeting of the committee would be held on tuesday–wednesday, january 30–31, 2024. the meeting adjourned at 10:15 a.m. on december 13, 2023. notation vote by notation vote completed on november 20, 2023, the committee unanimously approved the minutes of the committee meeting held on october 31–november 1, 2023.  joshua gallin secretary 
